1		"    GUEST ESSAY Editorial Desk; SECT Aleksei Navalny Is Russia's True Leader  By Oleg Kashin  1,267 words 27 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     In 2003, four years into President Vladimir Putin's tenure and with liberal politics at a nadir, I visited the Moscow office of the center-left Yabloko Party. There, among the 50-something inveterate anti-communists that dominated the party, sat a 27-year-old staff member. It was Aleksei Navalny.  We quickly became friendly. We were members of the same generation and the same culture, we had the same views about good and evil, we spoke the same language. Though we didn't always agree, I felt that he and I were -- to quote Rudyard Kipling -- ''of one blood.''  It was obvious that such a man would feel cramped in a stuffy old party, and so it turned out. But it was not at all obvious that Mr. Navalny would rise to be the undisputed leader of the opposition, his challenge to Mr. Putin's rule so profound it would lead to the regime's efforts to silence him -- through attempted assassination, imprisonment and illness that last week threatened to tip over into death -- and to thousands of Russians, across the country, taking to the streets to protest his mistreatment. Russia now has two national leaders: Mr. Putin in the Kremlin and Mr. Navalny in prison.  When we first met, such a future -- if someone had beamed back from 2021 to tell us of it -- would have seemed far-fetched. At the time, an opposition movement was slowly taking shape. And at comings together of opposition figures, united in their disagreement with Mr. Putin if little else, I would often see my old acquaintance Aleksei Navalny. He understood that real political life was there, not in his own party, and he rapidly became one of the notable figures of the opposition.  His expulsion from Yabloko in 2007 for participating in a nationalist demonstration -- which he'd attended out of solidarity with the nationalists facing the Kremlin's repression -- was no great loss for him. He had already created a name for himself as the author of a popular blog: While others cursed Mr. Putin and held protests for freedom of assembly, Mr. Navalny set to work exposing abuses in state corporations and accusing the authorities of thievery. Criticizing corruption was more convincing than slogans advocating democracy.  Yet the turning point, for the country and for Mr. Navalny, came in 2011, when Mr. Putin decided to become president of Russia again and his party, United Russia, gathered a wildly improbable majority. Mass protests broke out and the leaders of the opposition, who had grown accustomed to seeing a hundred or so people at their gatherings, suddenly found themselves looking out at tens of thousands of citizens.  It's tempting at this point to say that there was a leadership competition that Mr. Navalny won, but that would not be true. There were many other leaders: the liberal Boris Nemtsov, the Communist Sergei Udaltsov, the nationalist Alexander Potkin, the former prime minister Mikhail Kasyanov, the chess champion Garry Kasparov. But one after the other -- through assassination, intimidation, imprisonment and blackmail -- they disappeared from the scene.  That left just Mr. Navalny, leading some to suspect he was working for the Kremlin, an impression bolstered by the fact that in 2013 he was publicly released from prison and allowed to participate in the Moscow mayoral election. If any suspicions lingered -- even after he was given another suspended sentence and attacked with green dye -- they were decisively ended in August last year, when Mr. Navalny was apparently poisoned with Novichok aboard a flight to Moscow. It became clear that the Kremlin had simply been keeping Mr. Navalny for dessert.  Mr. Navalny insists that his poisoners, acting on Mr. Putin's orders, intended to kill him. But perhaps, as an investigation by the Dossier Center -- financed by the former oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky, a Kremlin critic who spent nearly 10 years in prison -- suggested, the plan was not to kill Mr. Navalny but to frighten him away. That would make sense. After all, many of Mr. Putin's previous opponents have, in duress or fear, permanently left Russia.  When Mr. Putin agreed to allow Mr. Navalny's evacuation to Germany for treatment, he in all likelihood felt sure that the man would not come back. It was a fair bet: Over the years of Mr. Putin's power, the more people have had access to automobiles, appliances and consumer electronics, the more they have consented to limitations on their freedom and political activity. Mr. Putin probably felt sure that Mr. Navalny was like the others -- that between prison in Russia and a life of comfort in Europe, he would choose the latter. But Mr. Putin miscalculated.  Even before completing his treatment in Germany, Mr. Navalny stated that he was going back to Russia; he even publicly announced his flight number and departure time. Once arrived, he was duly arrested at passport control. There followed an emergency hearing at a local police precinct house, several weeks in a Moscow jail and then sentencing to over two years in a penal colony. At every step, Mr. Navalny released statements on social media through his lawyers, his trademark humor and self-confidence visible throughout.  Even when in jail his legs started to fail and he demanded to see his doctors, he made a joke about it: He said that he had gotten used to his leg and didn't want to lose it. It was the behavior of a brave, proud, unbroken man standing up to an inhumane system, whose weapons are prison and violence -- an archetypical plot, familiar to any country that has experienced dictatorship. Though Mr. Navalny's condition, at times dire, seems to have stabilized, there can be no assurance of his safety as long as he languishes in prison. The prospects for the opposition movement -- not least after the activities of the Anti-Corruption Foundation, Mr. Navalny's political organization, were suspended on Monday -- look bleak.  As for Mr. Putin, he has discovered the folly of refusing to face his opponent honestly. The protests that swept across the country on Wednesday -- following major demonstrations in support of Mr. Navalny in January -- attest to the strength of Mr. Navalny's appeal and, more important perhaps, to the depth of ordinary Russians' dissatisfaction with their ruler. This was of his own doing. By not recognizing Mr. Navalny's right to participate in politics, Mr. Putin brought himself into a confrontation with a leader who is his equal.  Now, after getting rid of all his opponents, real and imaginary, Mr. Putin finds himself alone. Like the queen in a Russian fairy tale, who every day asks a magic mirror who's the fairest of them all, he desperately craves supremacy. But when he asks the mirror who Russia's true leader is, it answers: Aleksei Navalny.  Oleg Kashin (@KSHN) is a journalist and the author of ''Fardwor, Russia! A Fantastical Tale of Life Under Putin.'' This essay was translated by Carol Apollonio from the Russian.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by The new_york_times: photographs by James Hill for The new_york_times, Jordan Lye/Gettty Images and PAVEL KOROLYOV/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005i "
2		"    Daniel Kaminsky, Internet Security Savior, Dies at 42  By Nicole Perlroth  1,613 words 27 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     If you are reading this obituary online, you owe your digital safety to him.  Daniel Kaminsky, a security researcher known for his discovery of a fundamental flaw in the fabric of the internet, died on Friday at his home in San Francisco. He was 42.  His aunt, Dr. Toby Maurer, said the cause was diabetes ketoacidosis, a serious diabetic condition that led to his frequent hospitalization in recent years.  In 2008, Mr. Kaminsky was widely hailed as a latter-day, digital Paul Revere after he found a serious flaw in the internet's basic plumbing that could allow skilled coders to take over websites, siphon off bank credentials or even shut down the internet. Mr. Kaminsky alerted the Department of Homeland Security, executives at Microsoft and Cisco, and other internet security experts to the problem and helped spearhead a patch.  He was a respected practitioner of ''penetration testing,'' the business of compromising the security of computer systems at the behest of owners who want to harden their systems from attack. It was a profession that his mother, Trudy Maurer, said he first developed a knack for at 4 years old after his father gifted him a computer from Radio Shack. By age 5, Mrs. Maurer said, Mr. Kaminsky had taught himself to code.  His childhood paralleled the 1983 movie ''War Games,'' in which a young child, played by Matthew Broderick, unwittingly accesses a U.S. military supercomputer. When Mr. Kaminsky was 11, his mother said, she received an angry phone call from someone who identified himself as a network administrator for the Western United States. The administrator said someone at her residence was ''monkeying around in territories where he shouldn't be monkeying around.''  Without her knowledge, Mr. Kaminsky had been examining military websites. The administrator vowed to ''punish'' him by cutting off the family's internet access. Mrs. Maurer warned the administrator that if he made good on his threat, she would take out an advertisement in The San Francisco Chronicle denouncing the Pentagon's security.  ''I will take out an ad that says, 'Your security is so crappy, even an 11-year-old can break it,''' Mrs. Maurer recalled telling the administrator, in an interview on Monday.  They settled on a compromise punishment: three days without internet.  Nearly two decades after he lost his access to the internet, Mr. Kaminsky wound up saving it. What Mr. Kaminsky discovered in 2008 was a problem with the internet's basic address system, known as the Domain Name System, or DNS, a dynamic phone book that converts human-friendly web addresses like NYTimes.com and Google.com into their machine-friendly numeric counterparts. He found a way that thieves or spies could covertly manipulate DNS traffic so that a person typing the website for a bank would instead be redirected to an impostor site that could steal the user's account number and password.  Mr. Kaminsky's first call was to Paul Vixie, a longtime steward of the internet's DNS system. The usually unflappable Mr. Vixie recalled that his panic grew as he listened to Mr. Kaminsky's explanation. ''I realized we were looking down the gun barrel of history,'' Mr. Vixie recalled. ''It meant everything in the digital universe was going to have to get patched.''  Mr. Vixie asked Mr. Kaminsky if he had a fix in mind. ''He said, 'We are going to get all the makers of DNS software to coordinate a fix, implement it at the same time and keep it a secret until I present my findings at Black Hat,'' Mr. Vixie said, referring to an annual hacking conference in Las Vegas.  Mr. Kaminsky, then the director of penetration testing at IOActive, a security firm based in Seattle, had developed a close working relationship with Microsoft. He and Mr. Vixie persuaded Microsoft to host a secret convention of the world's senior cybersecurity experts.  ''I remember calling people and telling them, 'I'm not at liberty to tell you what it is, but there's this thing and you will need to get on a plane and meet us in this room at Microsoft on such-and-such date,''' Mr. Vixie said.  Over the course of several days, they cobbled together a solution in stealth, a fix that Mr. Vixie compared to dog excrement. But given the threat of internet apocalypse, he recalled it as being the best dog excrement ''we could have ever come up with.''  By the time Mr. Kaminsky took the stage at Black Hat that August, the web had been spared. Mr. Kaminsky, who typically donned a T-shirt, shorts and flip flops, appeared onstage in a suit his mother had bought for him. She had also requested that he wear closed-toed shoes. He sort of complied -- twirling onto the stage in roller skates.  When his talk was complete, Mr. Kaminsky was approached by a stranger in the crowd. It was the administrator who had kicked Mr. Kaminsky off the internet years earlier. Now, he wanted to thank Mr. Kaminsky and to ask for an introduction to ''the meanest mother he ever met.''  While his DNS fix was Mr. Kaminsky's most celebrated contribution to internet security, it was hardly his only contribution. In 2005, after researchers discovered Sony BMG was covertly installing software on PCs to combat music piracy, Sony executives played down the move. Mr. Kaminsky forced the issue into public awareness after discovering Sony's software had infected more than 568,000 computers.  ''He did things because they were the right thing to do, not because they would elicit financial gain,'' his mother, Mrs. Maurer, said.  (When a reporter asked Mr. Kaminsky why he did not exploit the DNS flaw to become immensely wealthy, he said that doing so would have been morally wrong, and that he did not want his mother to have to visit him in prison.)  Silicon Valley's giants often sought Mr. Kaminsky's expertise and recruited him with lucrative job offers to serve as their chief information security officers. He politely declined, preferring the quiet yeoman's work of internet security.  In a community known for its biting, sometimes misogynistic discourse on Twitter, Mr. Kaminsky stood out for his consistent empathy. He disdained Twitter pile-ons and served as a generous mentor to journalists and aspiring hackers. Mr. Kaminsky would often quietly foot a hotel or travel bill to Black Hat for those who could not otherwise afford it. When a mentee broke up with her boyfriend, Mr. Kaminsky bought her a plane ticket to see him, believing they were meant to be. (They married.)  He was outspoken when privacy and security were on the line. After the F.B.I. tried to force Apple, in federal court, to weaken the encryption of its iPhones in 2015, James B. Comey, who was then the F.B.I. director, testified to Congress in 2016 that he was not asking for a backdoor, but for Apple to ''take the vicious guard dog away and let us pick the lock.''  ''I am that vicious guard dog, and that used to be a compliment,'' Mr. Kaminsky told this reporter at the time. ''The question for Mr. Comey is: What is the policy of the United States right now? Is it to make things more secure or to make them less secure?''  The Electronic Frontier Foundation, a group that promotes civil liberties, said in a tweet on Saturday that Mr. Kaminsky was a ''friend of freedom and embodiment of the true hacker spirit.'' Jeff Moss, the founder of the DefCon and Black Hat hacking conferences, suggested that Mr. Kaminsky be inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame.  Mr. Kaminsky's empathy extended to his many side projects. When a friend struggled with color blindness, he developed the DanKam, a mobile app that uses a phone's camera to decipher colors otherwise indecipherable to the colorblind. When his grandmother Raia Maurer, now 97, experienced hearing loss, he refocused his efforts on hearing-aid technology. And when his aunt, a dermatologist, told him she could no longer treat under-resourced patients for AIDS-related skin diseases, some potentially fatal, in sub-Saharan Africa and Rohingya refugee camps, Mr. Kaminsky helped develop telemedicine tools for the National Institutes of Health and AMPATH, a health project led by Indiana University that he sought to bring to San Francisco during the coronavirus pandemic.  In addition to his mother and grandmother, Mr. Kaminsky is survived by his sister, Angie Roberts, and stepfather, Randy Howell.  Security was always Mr. Kaminsky's lifework, most recently as the chief scientist at White Ops, a security company he helped found that was recently renamed HUMAN. He was not above criticizing his own industry. In a 2016 keynote address at Black Hat, he said the industry had fallen far short of expectations. ''Everybody looks busy, but the house still burns,'' he said, before pitching the cyber equivalent of the Manhattan Project.  ''The internet was never designed to be secure,'' Mr. Kaminsky recalled in a 2016 interview. ''The internet was designed to move pictures of cats. We are very good at moving pictures of cats.'' But, he added, ''we didn't think you'd be moving trillions of dollars onto this. What are we going to do? And here's the answer: Some of us got to go out and fix it.''  Daniel Kaminsky, at his Brooklyn office in 2010, was widely hailed after finding a serious flaw in the internet's basic plumbing. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Chester Higgins Jr./The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005h "
3		"   TIMES INSIDER  How Four Years Shaped Girls' Views  By Claire Cain Miller  951 words 27 April 2021   2     After Hillary Clinton's loss and a tumultuous presidency, I reconnected with teens I had interviewed to get their sense of the world.  Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.  In 2016, shortly before the presidential election, I interviewed teenage girls about how the campaign had affected them. Based on polls, it seemed as if the United States was about to elect its first female president, after a race that had been riddled with sexist insults.  I followed up with them four years later, just after the 2020 election. We wanted to see how this tumultuous period had shaped them, because political science research shows that what people experience politically during their transition to adulthood often influences how they vote for a lifetime.  It was challenging to find the girls again, because most didn't live at home anymore and many were living in temporary locations during the pandemic. The first time, I had interviewed teenage girls at two high schools in Oregon -- one in liberal Portland and another in conservative Moro. This year, all the young women from Portland agreed to talk with me again, but only one from Moro did.  What I saw in them reflected the mixed message that girls frequently receive from society, something that has come up in other work I've done in my role writing about gender issues. Girls are told that they can become anything they want -- they sign up for robotics clubs and sports teams and school government. But as young adults, they learn a more complicated message: More doors are open to women, but sexism, of all kinds, remains rampant.  When I started covering gender for The Upshot, a team at The new_york_times that examines politics and policy issues, Susan Chira, an editor who had covered the topic earlier in her reporting career, told me that stories about women's issues must be retold again and again. Every new generation of young women faces the same issues as they start careers and families and come to terms with sexism and harassment, she said.  I've found this to be true, and it highlights how unfinished the work of feminism is, and how little has changed. But reporting on stories like this also shows clearly that there has been progress, too.  When I reconnected with the young women this year, they had all voted in their first presidential election and were well-informed on policy discussions. Some had become jaded about the ability of government to fix problems. They had been exposed to more sexism, and the ways in which sexism and racism intersect, in their own lives and on the public stage. They were less idealistic than they had been in high school -- one, Sarah Hamilton, 21, said the sexism she had observed had extinguished any goals she had of becoming a leader.  This change was also evident in two national polls we did for this reporting project. Shortly before the 2016 election, 83 percent of teenage girls surveyed said a candidate's gender made no difference in running for public office. But this year, 80 percent said women face sexism when they run, and only half thought men and women had an equal chance of being elected.  Despite those findings, the young women I interviewed all had high aspirations -- they wanted to become a novelist, an animal scientist and a basketball player. One, Ana Shepherd, 18, had decided to pursue politics as a direct result of what she saw the last four years. She was born in Mexico and felt she could help give immigrants a voice in policy.  Their thoughts had been molded by the racial justice protests, by Trump administration policies, by Hillary Clinton's loss and those of other women in the 2020 Democratic primaries. They spoke eloquently about the importance of representation in government and giving voice to people who had been marginalized. In high school, they had named role models like Beyoncé, the Kardashians and their school principal. Now they mentioned Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Vice President Kamala Harris.  Jordan Barrett, 19, was a supporter of Donald Trump in 2016 and the sole student from Moro who agreed to talk. The last four years, she said, have made her learn about perspectives other than those she grew up with, and think about issues like refugee policy and access to health care. She voted for Joe Biden.  I partnered with Ruth Fremson, a Times photographer, on this project, and she shot portraits of the girls in 2016 and this year. The photographs reflected the changes in their awareness, ambitions and sense of identity that I observed in my interviews. In the more recent set of photos, the young women are more mature and composed but still bright-eyed.  Returning to the group also brought up new topics I hadn't expected to explore in my reporting, most notably about race. Every one of them mentioned race in their discussions about leadership and sexism -- they saw these issues as interlinked.  The young women, even the more conservative ones, had progressive views about diversity -- something that young people of both parties share, surveys show. They demand that leadership reflects the people leaders represent. Whether it's in politics, their jobs or their daily lives, they are going to bring these values to the forefront.  Maybe I'll try to catch up with them again in 2024.  Ana Shepherd, in 2016 and now. She decided to get more involved in politics to help immigrants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH FREMSON)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005g "
4		"    Tesla Profit Hits Record For Quarter  By Neal E. Boudette  726 words 27 April 2021   4     The electric-car maker's performance reflected increasing sales and production around the world.  Tesla announced a solid quarterly financial performance on Monday reflecting continuing increases in sales and production around the world.  The electric-car maker reported earnings of 39 cents per share in the first quarter. That was a significant increase from the 24 cents per share it reported for the fourth quarter of 2020. A year ago, it earned just 2 cents per share in the first quarter as the coronavirus pandemic hurt sales and forced the shutdown of its plant in Fremont, Calif.  The quarterly profit of $438 million was Tesla's highest ever.  Tesla's chief executive, Elon Musk, suggested further growth in the coming quarters, saying he believed the Model Y, the company's small sport utility vehicle, would become one of the world's top sellers. ''There's a lot to be excited about in 2021 and 2022,'' he said on a conference call with analysts after the results were announced.  Like other automakers, Tesla has struggled with a chip shortage, ''one of the most difficult supply-chain challenges we've experienced,'' Mr. Musk said. But he said the company was able to switch to chips that were easier to acquire.  Earlier this month, Tesla said it delivered a record 184,800 cars in the first three months of the year, more than double the total from the comparable period in 2020.  ''Tesla continues to see growing pent-up demand throughout China and Europe,'' Dan Ives, a Wedbush analyst, wrote in a report to investors before the Monday announcement. In the United States, the Biden administration's push to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to support sales of electric vehicles is likely to help sustain demand for Tesla's cars, Mr. Ives added.  Although down from recent highs, Tesla shares are more than five times as valuable than they were a year ago. The stock declined more than 2 percent in extended trading after the earnings announcement, evidently because the results fell short of even higher expectations among some analysts.  The earnings news comes as Tesla is facing increasing questions about the safety of its Autopilot driver assistance system. Two men were killed this month in Texas when the Tesla Model S they were riding in crashed into a tree on a residential street and burst into flames. The local police said one man was found in the passenger seat and the other in the rear seat, with no one at the steering wheel when the crash occurred.  On the conference call on Monday, Tesla's chief engineer, Lars Moravy, said Tesla had examined the car with local and federal investigators and found the steering wheel was deformed, suggesting that someone was in the driver's seat at the time of the crash. All of the seatbelts were unbuckled, he added. Autopilot is supposed to disengage if the driver's seatbelt is unbuckled.  Tesla has also come under scrutiny in China, where authorities have looked into reports from consumers about battery fires and sudden acceleration by Tesla vehicles.  The company currently makes cars in Fremont and Shanghai. In its earnings report, it said it expected to begin production this year at factories it is building in Austin, Texas, and in Germany near Berlin.  Tesla said it expected deliveries to increase more than 50 percent this year from the 500,000 vehicles it sold last year. Some analysts expect the year's figure to reach 850,000 or more.  The Austin plant is supposed to produce an angular, futuristic-looking pickup, known as the Cybertruck, and a battery-powered semi truck. The Tesla Semi is supposed to go into production later this year, the company said. It gave no specific timetable for Cybertruck production.  Tesla said that it generated $293 million in cash in the quarter but that its cash on hand fell because it used $1.2 billion as part of its purchase of $1.5 billion of Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency. It used another $1.2 billion for debt and lease repayments.  A Tesla showroom in Brooklyn. After setbacks early in the pandemic, the automaker's sales have been strong. (PHOTOGRAPH BY An Rong Xu for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004w "
5		"    While Planning Succession, Windsors Reconsider Their Public Role  By Mark Landler  1,529 words 27 April 2021   9     Queen Elizabeth II is increasingly withdrawing to Windsor Castle, royal watchers say, while Prince Charles is stepping forward.  LONDON -- Queen Elizabeth II turned 95 last week, four days after burying her husband, Prince Philip, and with him the partnership that guided Britain's royal family for nearly 70 years. Now, as the queen faces the future alone, her son and heir, Prince Charles, is reshaping the family to carry on after her.  Philip's death has given new urgency to a transition already underway in the House of Windsor. With the queen's reign in its twilight, Charles has moved to streamline the royal family and reallocate its duties -- a downsizing forced by the loss of stalwart figures like Philip, as well as by the rancorous departure of Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, and the messy internal exile of Prince Andrew.  Buckingham Palace is conducting an after-action report on Philip's funeral ceremony, people with knowledge of the palace said, applying lessons from it to Operation London Bridge, the long-in-the-works, minute-by-minute blueprint for what will transpire in the days and weeks after the queen dies.  By all accounts, Elizabeth is in good health, bothered only by stiffness in her knees, which makes it hard for her to climb stairs. Royal watchers point out that her mother lived until 101. Buckingham Palace is busy planning her platinum jubilee, a four-day celebration in June 2022 to mark the 70 years since her accession to the throne.  Still, the poignant image of an aging, isolated queen, grieving alone in a choir stall at St. George's chapel during the funeral because of social distancing restrictions, drove home to many a sense of her vulnerability and fragility. It also raised questions about how active she will be, even after the pandemic ebbs.  ''Fundamentally, the queen will fade away gracefully,'' said Peter Hunt, a former royal correspondent for the BBC. ''Covid has helped in the sense that it has accelerated what any sensible 95-year-old woman would want to do, which is not stand on your feet all day long.''  As always with the royal family, details about its internal deliberations are elusive and befogged in speculation. Reports that Charles and William would hold a summit meeting to hash out the transition are pooh-poohed by people with ties to the palace.  The royal family, Mr. Hunt noted, rarely telegraphs such moments, leaving outsiders to read the tea leaves. Yet a few things seem clear.  While the queen has gone back to work since Philip's death, she is never going to return to the hectic schedule of meetings, receptions and garden parties that she plowed through for decades. She may come to Buckingham Palace only two days a week for meetings, these people said, preferring to stay at Windsor Castle, where she and Philip quarantined during the pandemic.  The queen conducted multiple meetings by video calls over the last year, showing off a wry wit in some of those virtual encounters. Like others who worked from home, she adjusted to the new environment, a person with ties to the palace said, and is not reflexively returning to the office just because it is reopening.  Charles, as Prince of Wales, had already taken over some of his mother's duties, including overseas trips and investiture ceremonies, in which people are granted knighthoods. He accompanies her to the state opening of Parliament; the next one is scheduled for May. And he spoke up after the furor over his brother Andrew's ties to the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, pressing to have him banished from public duties.  The biggest challenge for Charles is reconciling the family's workload with its reduced ranks. He has long favored a slimmed-down monarchy, built around him and his wife, Camilla; Prince William and his wife, Kate; and Harry and his wife, Meghan. Princess Anne, his younger sister, also remains a full-time royal.  But the decision of Harry and Meghan to withdraw from their duties and move to California blew a hole in those plans. There was no sign of a change of heart from Harry, or even much hope for a reconciliation with William, when Harry attended his grandfather's funeral. The brothers chatted briefly as they left the service, but Harry flew home before the queen's birthday on Wednesday.  There is also little prospect that Andrew will ever return to the fold. If anything, the palace is girding itself for further embarrassing disclosures this July when his friend Ghislaine Maxwell goes on trial in New York on charges that she trafficked underage girls on behalf of her employer, Mr. Epstein. Andrew has been accused of sexual misconduct by one of Mr. Epstein's victims, an accusation that he denies.  ''You're not going to get a situation on the balcony at Buckingham Palace, where people are pushing and shoving for a place,'' said Andrew Morton, a royal chronicler whose latest book, ''Elizabeth & Margaret,'' explores the relationship between the queen and her sister. ''It's going to be down to just a handful of people.''  Royals carry out more than 2,000 official events a year, many of which involve charity groups. About 3,000 philanthropic groups list a member of the family as their patron or president, according to the palace. Family members also take part in dozens of military and diplomatic ceremonies a year.  With so many events and fewer working royals, Mr. Morton said to the Foreign Press Association, the family will have to pick its shots. Given its commitment to the military -- showcased by the troops at Philip's funeral -- and its diplomatic responsibilities, he predicted that the family would scale back its charity work.  But that would raise a separate set of problems. The modern royal family, experts said, has defined itself and justified its taxpayer support largely through its public works. Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, maintained ties to hundreds of charities until he retired from official duties at the age of 96.  ''The key development of the monarchy in the 20th century is the development of the welfare monarchy, without which it won't survive,'' said Vernon Bogdanor, a professor of government at King's College London who has written about the role of the monarchy in Britain's constitutional system.  The short-term fix for the workload problem, people with ties to the palace said, is to elevate another royal couple, Prince Edward and his wife, Sophie, also known as the Earl and Countess of Wessex. Edward, 57, the queen's youngest son, and his wife emerged as prominent figures after Philip's death, speaking about his legacy and how the family was dealing with its grief.  Edward and Sophie had their own scrapes two decades ago when their private business activities -- her public-relations firm and his television-production company -- came under criticism for conflicting with their royal status. But they gave up those ambitions and submitted to the rigors of royal life.  In the process, Sophie, 56, forged close ties with the queen and her husband. On the eve of Philip's funeral, with the blessing of Buckingham Palace, Sophie released a private photo she had taken several years earlier of a beaming Elizabeth and Philip at ease in the Scottish countryside, not far from the queen's estate, Balmoral.  Charles, too, found his stature enhanced by the funeral, according to royal watchers. Some pointed to the dignified way he carried himself as he headed the procession behind Philip's coffin. Others noted his unselfconscious display of grief. At 72, they said, Charles had finally emerged from the long shadow of his father, with whom he had a complicated relationship, to be the family's patriarch.  ''He's looking like a much more confident character, happier in his own skin,'' said Penny Junor, a royal historian. ''He is now the paterfamilias of the family, which means he has new roles and responsibilities.''  Charles, however, must also reckon with his elder son, William, 38, who is in line to be king after him. Royal watchers said William had strong opinions about the structure of the family and how its duties should be reallocated. And he and his father have different views on how to conduct philanthropy, they said.  While Charles has built a sprawling portfolio of charities, William has preferred to devote time to a few favored causes. As president of the Football Association, he spoke out last week against an unpopular plan to create an elite soccer Super League, which would have pulled in several of the top clubs in Britain.  ''There is a difference between the way Charles envisages things and William envisages things,'' said Valentine Low, the royal correspondent of The Times of London. But he added, ''Charles acknowledges and even welcomes that William should have a role in these conversations.''  From left: Queen Elizabeth, Prince Charles and his wife, Camilla; Prince William and his wife, Kate. Charles is doing more as the queen narrows her public life. (POOL  BY PHIL HARRIS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004u "
6		"    Live Event Businesses Get Relief at Last  By Stacy Cowley  648 words 27 April 2021   5     After months of delays and technical problems, the federal government finally opened a $16 billion grant fund for music club operators, theater owners and others in the live-event business on Monday.  Thousands of people hit the website for the Shuttered Venue Operators Grant program the moment it began accepting applications. Speed mattered: The money -- awarded on a first-come-first-served basis -- is widely expected to run out fast.  One applicant posted a screenshot showing that he was in line behind more than 6,000 others waiting for their turn to apply. ''Hunger Games'' memes -- ''May the odds be ever in your favor'' -- popped up in Twitter posts from desperate business owners venting their collective anxiety.  But this time, the system stayed up. As of 5 p.m. on Monday, the agency had received 6,040 grant applications, according to Andrea Roebker, an agency spokeswoman. Nearly 8,400 more had been created but not yet been completed.  Sarah Elger, chief executive of Pseudonym Productions, an events production company in Philadelphia, successfully submitted her application 16 minutes after she got access to the system.  ''It was such a relief,'' Ms. Elger said. She was one of thousands of business owners who had their hopes dashed earlier this month, when the Small Business Administration, the agency that runs the program, tried -- and failed -- to start taking applications. After four hours, the agency took the system offline for what turned into weeks of technology repair work.  Ms. Elger estimated that she uploaded more than 100 documents for her application, which she and her husband, Ricky Brigante, spent months preparing. They knew they would have to move quickly once the application website opened.  ''We turned it into a game,'' Ms. Elger said. ''We had lots of folders on the desktop and raced through the uploads.''  The Small Business Administration said it would immediately start reviewing the applications, which are intended to yield grants for 45 percent of applicants' prepandemic gross earned annual revenue, up to $10 million.  ''We recognize the urgency,'' said Barb Carson, the deputy associate administrator of the agency's Office of Disaster Assistance. ''With venue operators in danger of closing, every day that passes by is a day that these businesses cannot afford.''  The program, created in the $900 billion economic support package that President Donald J. Trump approved in December, is the first large direct-to-businesses grant program the Small Business Administration has ever run. The process, for both the agency and applicants, has for months been fraught with complexity and confusion.  John Russell, the executive director of the Montford Park Players, a nonprofit community theater group in Asheville, N.C., submitted his application on Monday afternoon. He is relying on the grant to help cover his group's return to the stage.  After a full year of hosting only virtual events, the group is planning to open its first full in-person production, the Shakespeare play ''The Comedy of Errors,'' next month.  ''We figured people are in the mood for comedy,'' Mr. Russell said. The show's actors are volunteers, but the production creates paid jobs for its director, stage manager, lighting designer, food vendors and others, as well as for the theater troupe's support staff.  The Small Business Administration is also preparing to open a second grant program, the Restaurant Revitalization Fund, a $28.6 billion support fund for bars, restaurants and food trucks that was created in last month's $1.9 trillion relief bill. That program is planning a seven-day test to help the agency avoid the kind of technical problems that plagued the venue program.  Many venues like xBk, a small music club in Des Moines, that were closed by the pandemic hope to access funds. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHRYN GAMBLE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005n "
7		"    An Ending Hollywood Didn't Expect  By Nicole Sperling and Brooks Barnes  1,736 words 27 April 2021   1     Six years after #OscarsSoWhite, a diverse roster of artists won awards, though Anthony Hopkins's win over Chadwick Boseman as best actor surprised many.  LOS ANGELES -- In a break with tradition, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences decided to end its Oscars ceremony on Sunday with the prize for best actor instead of the one for best picture.  It was easy to understand why. The late Chadwick Boseman, nominated for his visceral performance in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' was the runaway favorite, and an acceptance speech by his widow was sure to be an emotional moment. Further, the best actor prize had gone to a Black man only four times in 93 years, and celebrating Mr. Boseman at the night's climax -- after a year in which racial justice was at the forefront of the country's consciousness -- would put an exclamation point on the academy's aggressive diversity and inclusion efforts over the past few years.  It backfired in spectacular fashion.  The film establishment instead went with Anthony Hopkins, rewarding his performance in ''The Father'' as a man suffering from dementia. Apparently certain that Mr. Boseman would win, Mr. Hopkins had decided not to attend the ceremony. With no one there to accept the award, the Oscars telecast abruptly ended, leaving the academy to face questions about whether it had misjudged its voting body.  ''At 83 years old, I did not expect to get this award -- I really didn't,'' Mr. Hopkins said in a video speech released Monday morning from his hometown in Wales and during which he paid tribute to Mr. Boseman.  The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which declined to make officials available for interviews on Monday, has spent the past few years trying to get its house in order after being excoriated for putting forward all-white slates of acting nominees in both 2015 and 2016. It has scrambled to enact diversity-focused reforms, most notably inviting about 4,000 artists and executives -- with a focus on women and people from underrepresented groups -- to become members. The organization now has about 10,000 voters. It says that about 19 percent of its members are from underrepresented racial and ethnic communities, up from 10 percent in 2015.  This year's ceremony had a chance to be a showcase for those efforts. Going into Sunday night, some awards handicappers predicted that movie history would be made, with all four acting Oscars going to people of color for the first time. Along with Mr. Boseman, Viola Davis was seen as a leading contender for the best actress prize for playing a blues singer in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom.'' Best actress instead went to Frances McDormand for playing a dour van dweller in ''Nomadland.'' It was her third best-actress statuette.  Still, the most diverse group of nominees in Oscar history resulted in several notable victories for supporting roles: Daniel Kaluuya, who played the Black Panther leader Fred Hampton in ''Judas and the Black Messiah,'' and Yuh-Jung Youn, for her comically cantankerous grandmother in ''Minari.'' She was the first Korean performer to win an acting Oscar, and only the second Asian woman. Chloé Zhao, who is Chinese, took home the best director prize, only the second woman to do so in Oscar history and the first woman of color.  Two Black women, Mia Neal and Jamika Wilson, won Oscars for makeup and hairstyling for the first time. Emerald Fennell (''Promising Young Woman'') was the first woman to take home a solo screenwriting Oscar in 13 years. And the director Travon Free was the first Black man to win in the best live-action short category. He was recognized for ''Two Distant Strangers,'' a film about police brutality that he made with Martin Desmond Roe.  ''This is the blackest Oscars of all time,'' quipped Lil Rel Howery, who served as an M.C. for a music trivia game that took place toward the end of the telecast and featured Glenn Close dancing to ''Da Butt,'' a song from the soundtrack to Spike Lee's ''School Daze.''  Many agreed that the diversity of this year's winners proved that the movie industry had become more inclusive. Others wonder if it is simply another anomaly in a strange year, one in which most studios delayed releasing many of their bigger-budget films because theaters were closed across the country, and those movies that were released tended to be smaller, independent films seen largely on streaming services -- if they were seen at all.  ''Like everything else, the pandemic affected the way movies were released, which affected, ultimately, the way people in films were nominated,'' said Todd Boyd, professor of critical studies at the University of Southern California's School of Cinematic Arts. ''It'll be difficult to know, until a few more years pass, whether this year is actually representative of something or if it's just a circumstance of the pandemic.''  Hollywood has been here before. In 2002, when Halle Berry won best actress for ''Monster's Ball,'' best actor went to Denzel Washington (''Training Day''). It was the first time those prizes were awarded to people of color in the same year, prompting Mr. Washington to remark ''Two birds in one night'' from the Oscar stage.  It seemed to be a moment of progress. But since then no other Black woman has won best actress, and the last Black man to win best actor was Forest Whitaker (''The Last King of Scotland'') in 2007. The academy has been a bit more inclusive in supporting categories. In the previous 20 years, there had been four Latino or Black supporting actor winners (none have been Asian), and six Black supporting actress winners (none were Asian or Latina).  ''There's so much work to do, guys, and that's on everyone in this room,'' Mr. Kaluuya said during his acceptance speech. ''That's not a single-man job. Every single one of you has work to do.''  The academy's efforts to diversify its membership came after decades of relative stagnation. In 2008, for instance, only 105 people were invited to join.  As part of its 2016 overhaul pledge, the group sharply increased the Oscar voting pool, inviting 4,046 artists and executives to become members over five years, including 1,383 from overseas. Virtually everyone invited to join the academy accepts, though not all. One of the industry's most prominent Black directors, Ryan Coogler (''Black Panther''), recently revealed that he did not accept the academy's overtures.  Last year, the academy announced a plan that will require films to meet diversity criteria to be eligible for a best-picture nomination, starting with the 2024 awards.  Still, those who have been critical of the way the film industry operates are not ready to heap too much praise on the academy's efforts.  ''What we have to constantly recognize is that an institution like the academy didn't give anything to Black people,'' said Rashad Robinson, president of the racial justice organization Color of Change. ''What the academy has done over the years is have a system and a set of rules that has stalled Black careers, which has prevented people from being able to be fully seen, which has had an economic impact on folks. Now that they are working to make some changes, let's acknowledge those changes but let's not give them any awards that they haven't earned.''  The yearslong process has been wrenching for the academy.  Inside the secretive organization, factions formed, with some people insisting that the problem was not with the academy, but with film companies and the lack of opportunities they provide for people of color. That many of the academy members also worked for these companies was another point of contention.  A glimpse of the animosity came when Bill Mechanic, an Oscar-nominated producer and former studio executive, resigned from the academy's board in 2018.  ''We have settled on numeric answers to the problem of inclusion, barely recognizing that this is the industry's problem far, far more than it is the academy's,'' Mr. Mechanic wrote in his resignation letter, which was leaked to the news media. ''Instead we react to pressure. One governor even went as far as suggesting we don't admit a single white male to the academy, regardless of merit!''  At the same time, some people have turned away from the Oscars because of its lack of diversity. Under 10 million viewers tuned into Sunday night's telecast, according to Nielson, a 58 percent drop compared with last year. One member of the academy's board of governors, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of confidentiality rules, said that market research had shown that people of color, upset about the racial disparity of nominees (and tired of seeing many of the same people get nominated over and over), had become less interested in the ceremony. A couple of smaller civil rights groups have called for viewing boycotts.  That was the case for April Reign, the campaign finance lawyer who originated the #OscarsSoWhite hashtag in 2015. Despite the changes at the organization, she said she believed the academy's efforts to diversify its voting body had fallen short.  ''It's still a popularity contest among all the white men,'' she said.  Others see reason for optimism in this year's Oscars, no matter how they ended.  ''To have a film about Fred Hampton that doesn't demonize him but instead celebrates him, and provides this broader story from a group of Black filmmakers, is, you know, kind of hard to believe that it would even be made much less be nominated,'' Mr. Boyd said of ''Judas and the Black Messiah.'' ''And we could go through each of these examples. It's great. It's wonderful. I just don't want it to be an isolated incident.''  Yuh-Jung Youn, the first Korean performer to win an acting Oscar, with Daniel Kaluuya and Frances McDormand at the ceremony in Los Angeles. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT PETIT/A.M.P.A.S., VIA GETTY IMAGES); The director Ryan Coogler, left, with Chadwick Boseman at the N.A.A.C.P. Image Awards in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS PIZZELLO/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B3)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004s "
8		"    What Were The Oscars Saying?  By A.O. Scott and Wesley Morris  1,897 words 27 April 2021   1     The anticlimactic night was in many ways not too different from previous Academy Awards, and it showed the organization was willing to change only so much.  On the morning after a very odd Oscars, we asked A.O. Scott, co-chief film critic, and Wesley Morris, critic at large, to discuss what they made of it all. The ceremony was always going to be unusual because of pandemic-related limitations, but it ended in one of the biggest letdowns in memory: when best actor, not best picture, was the final award of the night, and the winner was an absent Anthony Hopkins, not the expected Chadwick Boseman. Here's what our critics said:  A.O. SCOTT I'm trying to remember how I felt during most of the show, which was like a long, awkward but not entirely unenjoyable dinner party that I wasn't sure I'd actually been invited to. But we have to start at the end. The only explanation is that Steven Soderbergh and the other producers of the telecast were, like many of us, confident that Chadwick Boseman would take best actor, and envisioned a concluding tableau of pride and pathos, combining grief and celebration. Even Joaquin Phoenix's terse introductions of the best-actor nominees, after Renée Zellweger's prose paeans to the best-actress contenders, seemed to set up a somber, sublime moment.  What happened was more than just anticlimactic. Hopkins's award and the best-actress Oscar for Frances McDormand (''Nomadland''), while both entirely defensible on the merits, also sent a message. The academy is only willing to go so far in the direction of the new. And apart from the ''Nomadland'' triumph for best picture (which we'll get to), this seemed like a pretty standard Oscars, notwithstanding the weird format. The ''edgy'' movie (''Promising Young Woman'') gets a screenplay consolation prize, actors of color (Daniel Kaluuya, Yuh-Jung Youn) get supporting wins, but for the most part I'm reminded of the lyric to a song that Billie Holiday used to sing. ''Them that's got shall have. Them that's not shall lose.'' I guess that still is news.  WESLEY MORRIS Strangely, sadly, yes. And yet of those five actors, it makes all the sense in world for Anthony Hopkins to have won. He's titanic in ''The Father.'' His work there is like a fever dream of disorientation that was also probably in the average voter's geriatric wheelhouse. Meanwhile, Chadwick Boseman -- all of that unbridled zeal in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' came down to a promise that the academy couldn't keep. And like Adele and Billie Eilish at the Grammys, Anthony Hopkins is left to atone for sins not of his making.  That, of course, becomes the problem with these presumed coronations, whether they're aimed at Lauren Bacall, Glenn Close or the legacy of Chadwick Boseman. Oscars gonna Oscar. And when it comes to the academy's enduring award practices, especially with respect to Black people and best acting, I'm not sure anybody can count on enough of 9,000 people to do even the cosmetic reparative work.  Viola Davis gave the best performance of those 14 eligibility months. She was Daniel Day-Lewis in ''There Will Be Blood,'' without the landscape of such a monument. Yet there was monumentality in even the snarling she does in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' a movie about the very injustices of art-industry credit, recognition and respect that, year after year, this broadcast faces down and often finds a way to turn into a fiasco.  If the final minutes of this show really did feel like something of a moral massacre -- the comparisons to the finales of ''Game of Thrones'' and ''The Sopranos'' are out there; it was more like ''Sex and the City'' to me -- that was because there was no time to process the surprising yet not unanticipated outcome. The show ended first in a spree (best actor and actress took, what, three minutes?), then in a mass heart attack. Then: Credits!  Tony, do you find any symbolism or admission of crisis in the demotion of best picture to the third-to-last category? What besides honoring Chadwick Boseman did that mean?  SCOTT That decision underlined what has been evident over the past few years, which is that there is no coherent narrative about what movies are and why we should care about them -- no enabling myth or ideology -- that the broadcast could invoke. Nobody really knows what they're supposed to be doing, and so the night becomes an anthology of odd beats and non sequiturs, some baffling (Bryan Cranston in the empty Dolby Theater), some marvelous (Daniel Kaluuya's mom with the reaction GIF for the ages), some a little of both (Glenn Close and ''Da Butt''). These bits unfold not in an atmosphere of glamorous self-confidence, but in a mood of sweaty panic. You can feel the show tugging at your sleeve, begging for approval: Is this working? Is this OK? How about this?  The desperation was especially acute after the confusion and anxiety of the last year. Movie theaters shut down. Festivals went virtual. The already wobbly boundary between television and cinema all but collapsed. All in the midst of a public health emergency, sweeping protests and boiling political passions. What is an awards broadcast even supposed to look like? It was impossible to tell if this show was meant to signal an acknowledgment of pandemic circumstances or a guarded return to normal. Probably both, which only made it worse. The best-picture slate -- an eclectic blend of interesting movies, plus ''The Trial of the Chicago 7'' -- might have looked like a liability. Had anyone seen these pictures? Did anyone know what they were?  In the streaming era, it's hard to find the answer. But if movies are in existential limbo, at least there are still movie stars. Maybe the message in giving them the hoped-for big finish was equally a hedge, a reminder and a promise. We like these people, and we'll look forward to seeing them again in better times.  MORRIS Boy, do I hope you're right. But it was such a perplexing night for showing those off, too. It had that great opening with Regina King picking up a statue, then taking charge, first guided by Soderbergh's priorities of motion and verve, then in deploying her refulgence to honor the screenwriting nominees. A coming attraction for the caper to follow.  But after that start, which promised so much fun and swagger and cinema, the show became ... the Oscars. But even less so than usual, since after that opening strut, there wasn't even very much television on display. The seminal cutaway to Kaluuya's mother was wonderful, and the glimpse of Chloé Zhao in the background of someone else's close-up, back at her table after being named best director, still stunned, shaking her head in disbelief that, indeed, she is an Oscar winner, was a fleeting highlight. I just don't know what the show wanted us to know about the academy or the movies. It felt defensive and desperate and hubristically abstemious. No musical performances! No comedians! No clips of anybody doing any acting!  There was no bait for anyone to stick around. When you tune in to watch the Super Bowl or a debate, you know at least what the stakes are. You have a sense of somebody's narrative. Last night was the night for some kind of M.C. to guide us through what mattered, to make a case for remaining tuned in. This used to be the greatest commercial Hollywood could concoct for itself. That sort of pride now feels shameful. That's in part because the industry, courtesy of this show, has a lot to reconsider in terms of who's doing what both in the C-suites and among the craft guilds. But it's also because the industry continues to forsake itself.  I mean, it's eight years to the week that Steven Soderbergh, in a major speech at the San Francisco International Film Festival, tolled the movies' death knell, at least as he saw it. And there he was last night helping do the academy's custodial work after having proved himself highly adaptable to whatever it is cinema, to use his term, is becoming -- or being turned into. Am I overstating this? Are we beyond the point of no return when it comes to any of these distinctions? Should a Steven Soderbergh, one of our great filmmakers and sharpest thinkers about film as a philosophy, just be happy to have a job at this point?  SCOTT But what, really, is the shape of that crisis? Whatever the preoccupations and blind spots of our jobs, you and I are people who like movies. In 14 months since the last time we did this, I've liked a lot of movies, including a handful -- ''Nomadland,'' ''Minari,'' ''Judas and the Black Messiah'' -- that took home some statues. Those aren't just good movies; they're also movies that seem to me to hold a lot of promise for the future of the art form, whether audiences find them on big screens or small.  MORRIS Right, Tony. I'm surrendering to the inevitable when it comes to where a movie plays. All I want is the little bit of everything a work of art can offer -- surprise, insight, expansions of time, space, humanity or actors' waistlines -- to take me somewhere I couldn't have otherwise found myself. Most of those best-picture nominees were from relative newbies, folks making their first or second or third movie. Imagine how much stronger, more daring they could be, more determined to reshape the art form itself. Starting conversations that will go on to include and inspire filmmakers we've yet to hear from.  SCOTT But then I hear the canard that Hollywood doesn't entertain the way it used to, that it's sacrificed movie magic on the altar of wokeness or whatever -- a point of view recently advanced by Bill Maher and some of the sources in a recent column by Maureen Dowd -- and I wonder if the problem is something other than the rise of Netflix or the impossibility of finding a credible host. The Oscars would rather be anything other than a culture-war battleground, but at the moment that doesn't seem possible.  From the top: Joaquin Phoenix presenting at the Oscars Sunday night; as Daniel Kaluuya accepted the best supporting actor award, his mother and sister watched from London; the ''Nomadland'' team, with Frances McDormand speaking and Chloé Zhao second from right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY A.M.P.A.S., VIA REUTERS; ; ABC, A.M.P.A.S., VIA REUTERS; A.M.P.A.S., VIA GETTY IMAGES) (C1); Above, Steven Soderbergh, one of the Oscar telecast's producers. Top right, Anthony Hopkins, who won the award for best actor for his role in ''The Father.'' Many industry experts thought that Oscar would go to Chadwick Boseman, right, for his performance in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SEAN GLEASON/SONY PICTURES CLASSICS; DAVID LEE/NETFLIX, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004r "
9		"    For Apple and Facebook Chiefs, Privacy Dispute Is Public Feud  By Mike Isaac and Jack Nicas  2,174 words 27 April 2021   1     The chief executives of Facebook and Apple have opposing visions for the future of the internet. Their differences are set to escalate this week.  SAN FRANCISCO -- At a confab for tech and media moguls in Sun Valley, Idaho, in July 2019, Timothy D. Cook of Apple and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook sat down to repair their fraying relationship.  For years, the chief executives had met annually at the conference, which was held by the investment bank Allen & Company, to catch up. But this time, Facebook was grappling with a data privacy scandal. Mr. Zuckerberg had been blasted by lawmakers, regulators and executives -- including Mr. Cook -- for letting the information of more than 50 million Facebook users be harvested by a voter-profiling firm, Cambridge Analytica, without their consent.  At the meeting, Mr. Zuckerberg asked Mr. Cook how he would handle the fallout from the controversy, people with knowledge of the conversation said. Mr. Cook responded acidly that Facebook should delete any information that it had collected about people outside of its core apps.  Mr. Zuckerberg was stunned, said the people, who were not authorized to speak publicly. Facebook depends on data about its users to target them with online ads and to make money. By urging Facebook to stop gathering that information, Mr. Cook was in effect telling Mr. Zuckerberg that his business was untenable. He ignored Mr. Cook's advice.  Two years later, Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Cook's opposing positions have exploded into an all-out war. On Monday, Apple released a new privacy feature that requires iPhone owners to explicitly choose whether to let apps like Facebook track them across other apps.  One of the secrets of digital advertising is that companies like Facebook follow people's online habits as they click on other programs, like Spotify and Amazon, on smartphones. That data helps advertisers pinpoint users' interests and better target finely tuned ads. Now, many people are expected to say no to that tracking, delivering a blow to online advertising -- and Facebook's $70 billion business.  At the center of the fight are the two C.E.O.s. Their differences have long been evident. Mr. Cook, 60, is a polished executive who rose through Apple's ranks by constructing efficient supply chains. Mr. Zuckerberg, 36, is a Harvard dropout who built a social-media empire with an anything-goes stance toward free speech.  Those contrasts have widened with their deeply divergent visions for the digital future. Mr. Cook wants people to pay a premium -- often to Apple -- for a safer, more private version of the internet. It is a strategy that keeps Apple firmly in control. But Mr. Zuckerberg champions an ''open'' internet where services like Facebook are effectively free. In that scenario, advertisers foot the bill.  The relationship between the chief executives has become increasingly chilly, people familiar with the men said. While Mr. Zuckerberg once took walks and dined with Steve Jobs, Apple's late co-founder, he does not do so with Mr. Cook. Mr. Cook regularly met with Larry Page, Google's co-founder, but he and Mr. Zuckerberg see each other infrequently at events like the Allen & Company conference, these people said.  The executives have also jabbed at each other. In 2017, a Washington political firm funded by Facebook and other Apple rivals published anonymous articles criticizing Mr. Cook and created a false campaign to draft him as a presidential candidate, presumably to upend his relationship with former President Donald J. Trump. And when Mr. Cook was asked by MSNBC in 2018 how he would deal with Facebook's privacy issues if he was in Mr. Zuckerberg's shoes, he replied, ''I wouldn't be in this situation.''  Apple and Facebook declined to make Mr. Cook and Mr. Zuckerberg available for interviews and said the men have no personal animosity toward each other.  Regarding the new privacy feature, Apple said, ''We simply believe users should have the choice over the data that is being collected about them and how it's used.''  Facebook said Apple's feature was not about privacy and was instead about profit.  ''Free, ad-supported services have been essential to the growth and vitality of the internet, but Apple is trying to rewrite the rules in a way that benefits them and holds back everyone else,'' a spokeswoman said.  A Chasm Opens  Mr. Cook and Mr. Zuckerberg first intersected more than a decade ago, when Mr. Cook was second in command at Apple and Facebook was a start-up.  At the time, Apple saw Facebook as a hedge against Google, the search giant that had expanded into mobile phone software with Android, a former Apple executive said. Around 2010, Eddy Cue, who leads Apple's digital services, sought out Mr. Zuckerberg for a potential software partnership, the former executive said.  In the ensuing meetings, Mr. Zuckerberg told Mr. Cue that Apple had to deliver a great deal for a partnership, or the social network would be happy to go it alone, this person said. Some Apple executives felt those interactions showed that Mr. Zuckerberg was arrogant, this person added.  Two other people said that the talks were cordial and that they were confused by the characterization of the meetings. The discussions eventually led to a software feature that let iPhone owners share their photos directly to Facebook.  But the friction had set the tone. The situation was complicated as Facebook and Apple also became mutually dependent. The iPhone was a key device for people to use Facebook's mobile app. And Facebook's apps -- which later also included Instagram and the messaging service WhatsApp -- have been some of the most downloaded programs from Apple's App Store.  By 2014, Facebook executives had grown fearful of the leverage that Apple had over the distribution of its apps with iPhone customers. Those concerns were compounded when Apple at times delayed updates of Facebook's apps through its App Store, said people familiar with the matter.  In February 2014, when Facebook's board met to discuss Project Cobalt, which was a potential acquisition of an unidentified large social app, Apple's power was top of mind. Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's chief operating officer, argued for the deal partly to protect the social network from Apple's and Google's control over smartphone software, according to the meeting's minutes, which were released last year as part of a congressional investigation into tech companies.  Adding another popular app to Facebook's offerings ''would make it more difficult for operating system providers to exclude the company's mobile applications from mobile platforms,'' Ms. Sandberg said.  Mr. Cook, too, began thinking more negatively of Facebook, former Apple executives said. After the 2016 presidential election, federal authorities revealed that Russians had misused Facebook to inflame American voters. In 2018, the Cambridge Analytica revelations broke, highlighting Facebook's collection of user data.  Mr. Cook decided to distance Apple from Facebook, the people said. While Mr. Cook had raised privacy as an issue as early as 2015, he ramped that up in 2018. Apple also unveiled a new corporate motto: ''Privacy is a fundamental human right.''  This was in line with Apple's marketing pitch, which was that people should buy $1,000 iPhones to help protect themselves from the internet's harms.  When asked in an interview that year on MSNBC about Cambridge Analytica, Mr. Cook called the situation ''dire'' and suggested ''some well-crafted regulation is necessary'' for Facebook.  Then, at its 2018 developer conference, Apple unveiled technology changes that struck at Facebook's ad business. Those included a built-in screen-time tracker for iPhones that let users set time limits on certain apps, which affected companies like Facebook that need people to spend time in apps to show them more ads.  Apple also said that to protect people's privacy, it would require companies to get permission from users of its Safari internet browser to track them across different websites. Facebook has used such ''cookie'' tracking technology to gather data, which enables it to charge advertisers more.  ''It really spoke to the power of Apple controlling the operating system,'' said Brian Wieser, president of business intelligence at GroupM, an advertising industry firm. ''Facebook isn't in control of its own destiny.''  At Facebook, Apple's privacy moves were viewed as hypocritical, said three current and former Facebook employees. Apple has long had a lucrative arrangement with Google to plug Google's data-hungry search engine into Apple products, for instance. Facebook executives also noted that Apple was entrenched in China, where the government surveils its citizens.  Privately, Mr. Zuckerberg told his lieutenants that Facebook ''needed to inflict pain'' upon Apple and Mr. Cook, said a person with knowledge of the discussions. The Wall Street Journal previously reported Mr. Zuckerberg's comment.  Behind the scenes, that work had already begun. In 2017, Facebook had expanded its work with Definers Public Affairs, a Washington firm that specialized in opposition research against its clients' political foes. Definers employees distributed research about Apple's compromises in China to reporters, and a website affiliated with Definers published articles criticizing Mr. Cook, according to documents and former Definers employees.  Definers also began an ''astroturfing'' campaign to draft Mr. Cook as a 2020 presidential candidate, presumably to put him in President Trump's cross hairs, The new_york_times reported in 2018. A website, ''Draft Tim Cook 2020,'' featured a lofty quote from the chief executive and a model campaign platform for him. Data behind the website linked it to Definers.  (Definers' work against Apple was also funded by Qualcomm, another Apple rival, according to a Definers employee. Facebook fired Definers after The Times reported on its activity.)  Apple and Facebook have also started competing in other areas, including messaging, mobile gaming and ''mixed-reality'' headsets, which are essentially eyeglasses that mix digital images into a person's view of the world.  By the 2019 Sun Valley meeting, Mr. Zuckerberg's and Mr. Cook's relationship had reached a low. Then it got even worse.  App Tracking  At Apple's virtual developer conference last June, Katie Skinner, a manager on the privacy team, announced that the company planned a new iPhone feature to require apps to get users' consent to track them across different apps. She discussed it for just 20 seconds.  To Facebook, it was a declaration of war, three current and former employees said. If people were given the option to not be tracked, that could hurt Facebook's ad business, the executives figured.  The announcement came on top of a fight over gaming. Last year, Apple rejected a Facebook Gaming app from its App Store at least five times, until the social network had sufficiently tweaked the program.  Over the next few months, Facebook and Apple sniped at each other over the new tracking transparency feature in letters to privacy organizations and advertising coalitions. Then in December, Facebook took out full-page ads in The Times and other publications about the change. It declared Apple's privacy feature would hurt small businesses' ability to advertise and said it was ''standing up to Apple.''  Facebook also met with advertising clients to warn them about Apple's change, according to a copy of a December video presentation that was viewed by The Times.  ''Apple made unilateral decisions without consulting the industry about a policy that will have far-reaching harm on businesses of all sizes,'' a Facebook product director said in the presentation. ''The impact of Apple's changes makes it harder to grow. And for some, even survive.''  Apple delayed the feature so apps and advertisers could prepare, but Mr. Cook refused to change how it worked. And in a picture to show the new feature, Apple used an image of a familiar app: Facebook.  Mr. Zuckerberg has since shifted his tune about Apple's move. With Wall Street nervous about the effect on Facebook's business, he said in a March interview on the audio chat app Clubhouse that Apple's feature could benefit the social network. If advertisers struggled to find customers across different apps, he said, they might gravitate more toward Facebook because of its already enormous troves of data.  ''It's possible that we may even be in a stronger position,'' he said.  But Mr. Zuckerberg has also been blunt about Facebook's feelings on Apple. ''We increasingly see Apple as one of our biggest competitors,'' he said in an earnings call this year.  Even on that point, Mr. Cook has disagreed.  ''I'm not focused on Facebook,'' he told The Times this month. ''I think that we compete in some things. But no, if I'm asked who our biggest competitors are, they would not be listed.''  Tim Cook, Apple C.E.O., above, and Mark Zuckerberg, head of Facebook, top. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JEFF CHIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS; ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS/GETTY IMAGES) (A1);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY MEL HAASCH) (A24)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00047 "
10		"   FRANCE DISPATCH  France Is Locked Down, but Its Bureaucracy Is Thriving  By Roger Cohen  1,225 words 27 April 2021   11     Walk the dog? Only one kilometer. Want a raclette maker? Sure. A lamp? Nope. During the pandemic, France's bureaucracy has hit overdrive, and the French are increasingly fed up.  PARIS -- Three French lockdowns, and counting, over the past 13 months have been many things, among them a rare opportunity for the formidable national bureaucracy of about 5.6 million public servants to display their gift for the complication of lives.  With the announcement of the third Paris lockdown last month to try to control the spread of the coronavirus, an apotheosis of the absurd was reached.  A dense, two-page version of the notorious ''attestation,'' a government form to be completed anytime one leaves home, was so convoluted that it tied the Interior Minister's spokeswoman in verbal knots trying to explain it. The document had metastasized with each lockdown into an ever more ungainly monster.  Which of 15 boxes to check? That you planned to walk one kilometer with your dog, the maximum allowed, or up to 10 kilometers with your children? Would you be allowed 11 kilometers if you took the kids and the pet? What if Fido wanted to walk 10 kilometers and little Mathilde none?  How to get your head around hairdressers, vendors of electronic cigarettes, video game outlets and chocolatiers being deemed essential stores, and so allowed to open, but shoe shops, beauty salons, clothing boutiques and department stores being forced to close?  Familiarity with the labyrinthine thought processes of the French functionary was clearly needed. France, as one former prime minister, Georges Clemenceau, observed, ''is an extremely fertile country: You plant functionaries and taxes grow.''  ''The document is complex,'' Camille Chaize, the Interior Ministry spokeswoman, conceded. But she suggested that the distances permitted for each activity were self-explanatory. One kilometer, for example -- a little over half a mile -- was plainly the radius for a dog to urinate, she argued.  Still, it seemed far from self-explanatory that for shopping of ''first necessity,'' the document allowed 30 kilometers (19 miles) and even further for ''professional'' purchases.  Before I could exploit such unexpected latitude -- once I figured out what counted as ''first necessity''-- the government nixed the document, which collapsed within 24 hours under the weight of its absurdity after being denounced as a ''multiple-choice quiz'' by Valérie Boyer, a senator for the center-right Republicans.  Instead of having to answer a bunch of questions, mere proof of residence now suffices to go anywhere within 10 kilometers of home for an unlimited time. But not, of course, after the 11-hour curfew, which was slightly relaxed to start at 7 p.m. instead of 6 p.m.  There is a presidential election a year from now in France, so a restriction (lockdown No. 3) had to be offset by a concession to voters (an extra hour before the curfew for an aperitif).  The French are fed up, and President Emmanuel Macron has to find a delicate balance between tamping down the virus and not pushing an already exasperated public into outright revolt with further restrictions on movement.  The lockdowns have cut the social fabric of life, whose nexus is the table, where grumbling and laughter (including about the bureaucracy) gets into high gear.  Despite the reforming ambition of successive presidents -- Jacques Chirac spoke of the ''obesity of the state'' in 1986 -- the number of functionaries has grown by over one million in the last 30 years and now represents 22 percent of the entire work force. They are resilient.  They also provide support unimaginable in the United States. Since arriving here four months ago, I have had a serious bicycle accident that resulted in two hospitalizations, a full brain scan and other tests. For all of this, I was charged about $250. French universal health care works, as does the welfare state. There are free Covid test pop-up tents all over Paris. The tightly organized lockdowns have stopped the pandemic from getting worse.  Still, one can get too much of a good thing.  I recently rented an apartment and needed to furnish it. As a result, I found myself at Castorama, a sort of D.I.Y. emporium with a few Gallic flourishes, that was open only because its surface area did not exceed the 10,000-square-meter limit (a little over 100,000 square feet) set by the government for such stores.  In truth, the store was only kind of open. Red-and-white tape, as if strung up around a crime scene, surrounded some sections, including the one for lamps, sconces and other wall light fixtures.  This was how I learned more about essential vs. nonessential items under the lockdown. I could buy electric cheese-heating raclette makers in a dozen different models. I could buy toasters galore, pans in all shapes, any form of home stereo equipment -- but not a desk lamp.  At Boulanger, an electronics store, smoothie makers and vacuum cleaners were available for sale, but not refrigerators, stoves or other large appliances that had been roped off.  How this comported with controlling the coronavirus -- over 100,000 people in France have died from it, and more than five million have been infected -- was not immediately clear.  The sheer intricacy of the bureaucratic obtuseness overwhelmed me. I could not help wondering whether some fraction of the many hours devoted to coming up with such regulations might have been better used speeding the vaccines to more people. France has up to now underwhelmed in getting its population vaccinated.  The country's shoe repair stores are open, even if you can't buy new shoes. Its florists are open, but not kitchenware stores. Its frozen goods shops are open, but not gift shops. Bookstores are open now, although they were closed in the first lockdown. All restaurants, bars and cafes are closed. Mr. Macron has suggested that some easing of restrictions will start on May 3 -- maybe.  One sign I recently passed in a shuttered beauty salon read: ''Contrary to 'hairdressers,' it seems we are not essential to well-being. Injustice!''  As for lingerie and underwear stores, deemed nonessential and so closed, they have embarked on a national protest involving sending lacy panties every day to Prime Minister Jean Castex from all over France.  I know there has to be a logic to what's open and what's closed. France, after all, still has a commissioner general for planning, as if the Soviet Union had never disappeared. The country proceeds with methodical purpose based on the analysis and forecasts of highly trained public servants, formed in elite schools.  Still, an overwhelming question grips my entire being: Why these apparently arbitrary rules?  I asked a Castorama store assistant to explain why, for example, the lamps I coveted were off limits while I could buy a crepe maker.  ''I don't really know,'' she said. ''But, of course, you can always use a candle.''  Clockwise from top: lamps taped off at a home goods store in Paris; people walking along the Seine; an open flower shop; residents at the Place des Vosges. There is a complicated, sometimes baffling list of what is allowed and what is not during the virus restrictions. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DMITRY KOSTYUKOV FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00049 "
11		"   BEST OF LATE NIGHT  Late Night Wraps Up This Year's Academy Awards  By Trish Bendix  898 words 27 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     ''The ratings for the Oscars plummeted from 23 million last year to less than 10 million this year. How can something so woke put so many people to sleep?'' Jimmy Kimmel joked on Monday.  Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night's highlights that lets you sleep -- and lets us get paid to watch comedy. We're all stuck at home at the moment, so here are the 50 best movies on Netflix right now .  Are You Still Watching?  On Monday, late-night hosts weighed in on Sunday night's Oscars ceremonies, which, despite some historic firsts and funny moments, brought in a much smaller audience than last year's awards.  ''The ratings for the Oscars plummeted from 23 million last year to less than 10 million this year. How can something so woke put so many people to sleep?'' Jimmy Kimmel asked.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''The ceremony was watched by a record-low 9.9 million people. Yeah, 9.9 million. That's like taking everyone who watched 'Mank' and adding 9.8 million.'' -- JIMMY FALLON  ''I guess most people thought the show was a little sluggish and, at times, a bit uncomfortable. It was as if the whole ceremony had just gotten its second Pfizer shot.'' -- JIMMY FALLON  ''This was the Oscars that finally answered the question, 'What happens when you don't cut off acceptance speeches?' Turns out, they go on for a very long time.'' -- JIMMY KIMMEL  ''For whatever reason, the awards were held at Union Station downtown, which is the closest many of these stars have ever been to public transportation.'' -- JIMMY KIMMEL  ''Well, I guess the train station made sense 'cause I fell asleep 30 minutes in. When I woke up, I had no idea where I was.'' -- JIMMY FALLON  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''Now, despite the pandemic shaking everything up, the Oscars pulled off a lot of cool moments last night. I mean, we got to see an awards show in a train station, right? We saw Regina King get her steps in. And we even got to see Glenn Close audition to be in Cardi B's next video.'' -- TREVOR NOAH  ''But we also got a lot of history made last night. Chloé Zhao became the first woman of color to win Best Director, Yuh-Jung Youn was the first Korean actor to win an award, and Daniel Kaluuya, my friend, became the first person to get an Oscar and a beat down from his mama on the same night.'' -- TREVOR NOAH  ''You can't be saying 'sex' in front of African parents. In fact, I'm sure the only reason she didn't whip Daniel's [expletive] right there was just because there were too many white people in attendance.'' -- TREVOR NOAH  ''His mom was like, 'This is so embarrassing' and he was like, 'Relax, no one saw it.''' -- JIMMY FALLON  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''It was an historic evening. You know, before last night, an Oscar had never been given to a still photo of Anthony Hopkins before.'' -- JIMMY KIMMEL  ''There were some surprises, notably in the category of Best Actor. Everyone thought that would go to the late Chadwick Boseman. They even saved that category for the end of the show, assuming it would be a big emotional moment to wrap it up. But instead of Chadwick Boseman, Anthony Hopkins won Best Actor for playing a man with dementia in 'The Father,' and he was so committed to his role, he forgot to show up for the Oscars.'' -- JIMMY KIMMEL  ''And this is true. He was reportedly asleep when he won, which is not a great sign for network television when they say, 'Hey, Anthony, you know you might win tonight' and he's like, 'Eh, I'll just watch it on YouTube tomorrow.''' -- JIMMY KIMMEL  The Punchiest Punchlines (Missed Shots Edition)  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''Apparently, some people are refusing the second shot because they feared the side effects, which can include flulike symptoms. Unlike the coronavirus side effects, which can include deathlike death.'' -- STEPHEN COLBERT  ''One interesting group of people refusing to get the vaccine: people who have gotten the vaccine. Because millions of people are skipping their second doses of Covid vaccines. I can't believe it -- Americans are saying no to seconds?'' -- STEPHEN COLBERT  ''I mean, just a few weeks ago we were scrambling for appointments -- refresh, refresh, refresh. Now you can pick up Moderna shots in the two-for-one bin at Walmart.'' -- TREVOR NOAH  The Bits Worth Watching  Justin Bieber joined Jimmy Fallon and the Roots for a stripped-down version of his new single ''Peaches.''  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  What We're Excited About on Tuesday Night  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  The ''Pose'' star Billy Porter will appear on ''Jimmy Kimmel Live'' on Tuesday.  Also, Check This Out  Anthony Hopkins had to accept his Best Actor Oscar via social media because producers denied him an opportunity to go live via Zoom during the ceremony on Sunday night.  ''This was the Oscars that finally answered the question, 'What happens when you don't cut off acceptance speeches?' Turns out, they go on for a very long time,'' said Jimmy Kimmel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABC FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005j "
12		"    Special Court Scolds F.B.I. for Monitoring of Americans  By Charlie Savage  1,135 words 27 April 2021   17     Newly disclosed episodes in which analysts improperly searched for data about Americans largely came before changes at the bureau.  WASHINGTON -- For a second year, the nation's surveillance court has pointed with concern to ''widespread violations'' by the F.B.I. of rules intended to protect Americans' privacy when analysts search emails gathered without a warrant -- but still signed off on another year of the program, a newly declassified ruling shows.  In a 67-page ruling issued in November and made public on Monday, James E. Boasberg, the presiding judge on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, recounted several episodes uncovered by an F.B.I. audit where the bureau's analysts improperly searched for Americans' information in emails that the National Security Agency collected without warrants.  Rather than a new problem, however, those instances appeared largely to be additional examples of an issue that was already brought to light in a December 2019 ruling by Judge Boasberg. The government made it public in September.  The F.B.I. has already sought to address the problem by rolling out new system safeguards and additional training, although the coronavirus pandemic has hindered the bureau's ability to assess how well they are working. Still, Judge Boasberg said he was willing to issue a legally required certification for the National Security Agency's warrantless surveillance program to operate for another year.  ''While the court is concerned about the apparent widespread violations of the querying standard,'' Judge Boasberg wrote, ''it lacks sufficient information at this time to assess the adequacy of the F.B.I. system changes and training, post-implementation.''  Because of that, he added, the court concluded that ''the F.B.I.'s querying and minimization procedures meet statutory and Fourth Amendment requirements.''  Judge Boasberg's term as presiding judge on the special wiretapping court will end next month, after a tumultuous two years that also included the handling of its response to a damning inspector general report about errors and omissions in applications for traditional national security warrants to wiretap a Trump campaign adviser for the Justice Department's Russia inquiry.  Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. has selected Judge Rudy Contreras to succeed Judge Boasberg in that role, said a person familiar with the matter.  The position of presiding judge has taken on particular importance in recent years. While Congress created the court -- in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, or FISA -- to review evidence in individual wiretap applications for national security investigations, the presiding judge also handles oversight of the National Security Agency's warrantless surveillance program.  The program grew out of the once-secret Stellarwind project, which President George W. Bush started after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, based on a claim that his executive powers could override the FISA warrant requirement. In 2008, Congress legalized the practice, enacting a law known as Section 702 of the FISA Amendments Act.  That law authorizes the government to gather, without warrants, the phone calls and internet messages of noncitizens abroad with assistance from American companies, like Google and AT&T -- even when the foreign target is communicating with an American, raising the question of what the rules should be for Americans' messages that get swept in.  The surveillance is carried out by the National Security Agency, but three other entities -- the C.I.A., the National Counterterrorism Center and the F.B.I. -- also receive access to streams of ''raw'' messages intercepted without a warrant for their analysts to use. Of those, the F.B.I. is the only one that also has a law enforcement mission, heightening the stakes.  The F.B.I. receives only a small portion of the messages that the National Security Agency vacuums up: The bureau gets copies of intercepts to and from targets who are deemed relevant to a full and active F.B.I. national security investigation. Presently, that amounts to about 3.6 percent of the National Security Agency's targets, a senior F.B.I. official told reporters in a news briefing on Monday.  (That could still be a sizable amount of information. In 2019, the most recent year for which data is public, the program had more than 200,000 targets.)  In early 2018, when Congress extended Section 702, it amended the law in part to require approval every year by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of procedures limiting how and when analysts may query the repository for information about Americans.  Later in 2018, Judge Boasberg ruled that the bureau's procedures were inadequate to meet Fourth Amendment privacy standards. He required the F.B.I. to write down a specific reason for why each search for an American's information was likely to return foreign intelligence information or evidence of a crime. The Trump administration appealed that ruling but lost.  In late 2019, Judge Boasberg went on to scold the F.B.I. over episodes it reported to the court in which auditors found that analysts had improperly searched the repository. For example, an F.B.I. analyst in August 2019 had made a query for information using the identifiers of about 16,000 people, even though only seven of them had connections to an investigation.  His new ruling said an audit had uncovered several more episodes from around the same time.  For example, from April to July 2019, an employee in an F.B.I. field office conducted about 124 queries using identifiers for people who did not meet the standards, including community leaders who had applied to participate in a ''Citizens Academy'' to better understand the role of federal law enforcement, and people entering the F.B.I. office to perform repairs or to provide tips or report they were crime victims.  In a similar episode, from August to October 2019, a task force officer in another office conducted 69 improper queries, the ruling said.  Other reported violations involved analysts who failed to opt out of querying raw FISA information for purposes that did not meet its standards, like 110 searches an official conducted for an analytic paper. The ruling did not give a date for those improper queries.  The government on Monday also disclosed the annual set of rules for the agencies that can gain access to information from the warrantless surveillance program, including procedures for targeting foreigners, ''minimizing'' information gathered about Americans, and querying limits. While they were heavily redacted in places, Judge Boasberg wrote that they were ''largely a status-quo replacement of certifications and procedures'' that he had approved in late 2019.  The F.B.I. headquarters in Washington. A ruling said the bureau repeatedly violated rules intended to protect Americans' privacy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEFANI REYNOLDS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00044 "
13		"    New York's Electing a Mayor. New Yorkers Yawn.  By Michael Wilson  1,596 words 27 April 2021   1     Two months before the Democratic primary for mayor, arguably the most consequential New York City election in decades, voters have other things on their minds.  In Brooklyn's Church of St. Mark on a recent Sunday, Arlene Punnett, 82, listened patiently as a special guest spoke of his hardworking mother and his years as a police officer. His name was Eric Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, and he had come to seek the church's support in his run for mayor.  But for Ms. Punnett, he might as well have been visiting from a distant country. Asked later how much thought she's given the race to elect the city's next mayor, she held her thumb and finger in the shape of a perfectly round zero.  ''What can I tell you?'' she shrugged. ''Right now that's not the primary concern.''  Days later at a park in the Bay Ridge area of Brooklyn, a father shooting hoops with his family noticed a woman at a pop-up lectern nearby marked ''Garcia for NYC Mayor.'' He struggled to name other candidates: ''I'm guessing de Blasio,'' the father, Bob Mendez, 38, said.  Nope. The current mayor is not on the ballot. He tried again: ''Yang, or something?''  The next mayor of New York faces a staggering slate of extraordinary challenges: resuscitating tourism and refilling the empty skyscrapers of Midtown Manhattan, bringing jobs back and the commuters to perform them, lowering crime while raising confidence in the city's police and law enforcement. Those demands and many, many more have elevated the upcoming election -- the Democratic primary that will likely decide the next mayor -- to one of outsized consequence for millions of people.  And yet, a seemingly large portion of New Yorkers, with only eight weeks left before the primary, remain utterly disengaged and oblivious to the race and the platforms of the leading candidates. For many, the ongoing toils of living with the coronavirus -- vaccination appointments, unemployment, remote schooling -- and lingering weariness from the 2020 presidential campaign have crowded out time or energy for local politics.  Once again, New York seems to be telling a tale of two cities, with a mayoral race taking place in one of them while most everyone else is busy making do in the other.  ''They barely know that there's an election going on,'' said Ken Sherrill, a professor emeritus of political science at Hunter College and former Democratic district leader. ''Who the candidates are, when the primary is going to be -- that there's going to be a primary, and how to vote in it. Towering over everything is the pandemic.''  The coronavirus, besides reordering daily life for millions of New Yorkers, has eliminated some traditional sources of information about candidates and chances to interact with them. With no one working in offices, there are no water cooler moments to compare candidates with colleagues. For many, there are simply too many names -- 13 on the ballot in just the Democratic primary. And there are far fewer opportunities to happen upon a candidate, say, greeting commuters at a subway station.  A recent poll conducted by NY1 and Ipsos seemed to confirm the suggestions of disinterest seen on the streets. Just 33 percent of registered voters or those planning to register soon said they were certain they would vote in the June 22 primary. Among unregistered voters, only one in four intends to register in time. (The deadline is May 28.)  Sandra Wharton, a counselor who attended the service where Mr. Adams spoke, gave voice to those poll numbers. ''I have not been thinking about the candidates because there are so many more serious things happening,'' she said, even as she acknowledged this might not be the most civic-minded view. ''It's important, who we vote for, who we elect.''  In limited early polling of the race, Andrew Yang has seemingly emerged as the front-runner, with his 2020 presidential campaign giving him more name recognition than his rivals. Still, in one poll, half of likely Democratic voters were still undecided.  The candidates, after weeks or longer of straining against the constraints of Zoom events, have begun hitting the streets and returning to traditional retail campaigning as temperatures have warmed and vaccinations become more available. But on busy corners, outside borough halls and inside churches and other photogenic backdrops, they are regularly met with blank faces and wait-I-know-you-from-somewhere moments.  Vernon Dasher, 50, a train operator for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, leaned across his parked motorcycle outside Queens Borough Hall last week and watched a man whom he had first heard of only the day before attempt to make his case for mayor. The man, Raymond J. McGuire, a former executive at Citigroup, continued his pitch even as a nearby car alarm drowned him out.  ''I didn't even know it was an election year for the mayor,'' Mr. Dasher said. He has been preoccupied, to put it mildly, ''hoping that the city opens up.''  ''Another way you could put that is: Covid,'' he said.  Mr. Dasher said he'd love to sit out this election -- ''I keep saying, 'I'm not voting no more,' because I don't want to do jury duty!'' -- but knows he must not. ''I guess there is always that thought, 'Maybe my vote will count.''' (Also, New Yorkers are summoned to jury service whether they vote or not.)  Even Mr. Yang has yet to break through the noise that is 2021 for many. Ms. Wharton, at the church service in Brooklyn, knew that one of the candidates for mayor had run for president, but couldn't recall his name.  When Mr. Yang appeared at an event in the Bronx last week, his arrival was more annoying than enlightening for Ena Farquharson, 72, a retired nurse rushing to visit nearby friends and finding the sidewalk blocked.  She said she is too busy and drained to take on candidate research right now. ''The only thing I'm thinking about is Covid,'' Ms. Farquharson said.  The candidate Dianne Morales, a former nonprofit executive, held a block party in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn, with performers who included Christine Shepard, 24, who first learned Ms. Morales's name when she was invited. ''We're so oversaturated in news,'' Ms. Shepard said.  Nearby, Kevin Nimmons, 35, a paralegal who had been playing basketball and walked over for a closer look, said national events -- the presidential election, the Black Lives Matter movement, the trial over George Floyd's death -- crowded out local news.  ''There are a lot of more pressing issues, it doesn't really leave too much space,'' Mr. Nimmons said. ''Racism, classism, nationalism, sexism.''  Another factor unique to this race is the introduction of ranked-choice ballots, where voters will choose up to five candidates in order of preference for their next mayor. ''I think most people are going to be unable to rank, period,'' said Mr. Sherrill, the political scientist. ''They're going to give up. And it's not their fault. This is the wrong race to be breaking in a new system.''  These overwhelmed New Yorkers, of course, bump up against highly engaged neighbors at these events, and many are following the races closely. At Mr. Yang's appearance on Tuesday, a construction worker, Benjamin Gibs, 36, from Mott Haven, paused his labor across the street to hurry over for a closer look. He said he liked Mr. Yang's support for universal basic income and warnings about the rise of automation.  ''I vote on policy, not on party,'' Mr. Gibs said. ''He's clearly all economics.''  At the event in Bay Ridge for Kathryn Garcia, the former sanitation commissioner running for mayor, a lone man on a bicycle stopped outside a fence to listen. He was not just another curious voter, but a politician himself -- Jumaane Williams, the city's public advocate and a former councilman. He happened upon Ms. Garcia's event on his morning ride.  He said that in his experience, many voters believe it is too early to invest much time in the candidates. ''It feels like they're just starting to pay attention,'' he said before riding off.  Ms. Garcia also said voters typically wait until later in the race to more fully engage, and that this election was no different.  ''Everyone's undecided -- they're coming out of the hibernation of winter,'' said Ms. Garcia, who has actually been making personal calls to voters seeking their support -- an indication of how low the turnout might be. ''They get to it right as they're getting to vote. That's my experience. As a voter, too.''  Still, for some, this election feels different. Audrey Rosenblith, 26, who was walking her dog near the Morales event, said she is normally highly engaged in local races, even volunteering for candidates. But this race just feels like too much.  ''It's overwhelming right now because there are so many candidates,'' she said. ''Every time I try to do research, I abandon it because I get exhausted.''  Juliana Kim and Nate Schweber contributed reporting.  Juliana Kim and Nate Schweber contributed reporting.  Andrew Yang, left; Eric Adams, middle right; and Kathryn Garcia are among the 13 Democratic candidates. Only one in four unregistered voters intends to register by the May 28 deadline. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GABRIELA BHASKAR FOR THE new_york_times; JAMES ESTRIN/THE new_york_times; HILARY SWIFT FOR THE new_york_times) (A20)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005l "
14		"    South Korea Loved Her Long Before Hollywood  By Choe Sang-Hun  1,202 words 27 April 2021   12     Ms. Youn is the first Asian woman to win the best supporting actress Oscar since 1957. But it's her life story -- as well as her characters -- that made her award resonate among Koreans.  SEOUL -- ''Minari,'' the critically acclaimed movie about a hard-luck family of Korean immigrants in the United States, was not exactly a commercial blockbuster in South Korea: Fewer than a million people watched it in 54 days of screening across the country.  But when one of its stars, Yuh-Jung Youn, won the Academy Award for best supporting actress, South Koreans rejoiced not only because it was a first for a Korean actor, but also because of the recipient.  On Monday morning, the South Korean media sent out news flashes when Ms. Youn won her Oscar. Cable channels announced plans to screen her previous films. Social media was abuzz with fans congratulating her.  ''Her performance brilliantly helped us relive the memories of our own mothers and grandmothers,'' President Moon Jae-in said in a statement, referring to Ms. Youn's character in the film.  Ms. Youn was the first Asian woman to win the best supporting actress Oscar since 1957. But it's her life story -- as well as those of her characters -- that made her award resonate so deeply in South Korea, particularly among women who have long struggled under the country's male-dominant hierarchical order.  Minari is a parsley-like vegetable that is ubiquitous in Korea. It grows anywhere with a smidgen of moisture, including swamps and abandoned rice paddies.  If there is anyone like minari in the South Korean movie industry, it's Ms. Youn.  Long before her Oscar, Ms. Youn's image as a fiercely independent woman with an often irreverent wit had endeared her to South Koreans. In her 55 years as an actress, she often took on any work that she could get, including Korean soap operas, indie movies and reality shows. Her success defied the predictions of male producers who considered her plain-looking and found her raspy voice grating and unappealing.  ''The producers said they would eat their hat if I would make it as an actress,'' she once told a South Korean cable channel. ''Unfortunately, they are all dead now.''  For most of her career, Ms. Youn didn't have a choice but to take the work as it came. She had early success in films such as 1971's ''Woman of Fire,'' but left acting to marry Jo Young-nam, one of South Korea's best-known singers. In the 1970s, she followed him to the United States, where Mr. Jo tried on a career as a gospel singer. The marriage ended in divorce in the 1980s.  Ms. Youn returned to Seoul to pick up acting again at age 38. South Korean society at the time still held deep prejudices against women who were divorced, forcing her to scrape by. With two sons to raise, she said she ''never had the luxury of actresses who have wealthy husbands and can pick and choose movie roles.''  ''I did my work for survival and to put food on the table,'' she told a South Korean TV station in 2009. ''An actress can do her best work when she is most starved for cash. When you are hungry, you put your desperate best into your work.''  Her versatility landed her roles as the femme fatale, the loving grandmother and even an over-the-hill prostitute. When producers were casting for ''A Good Lawyer's Wife'' (2003), many female actresses declined the role of a woman who has sex with another man while her husband is terminally ill. Ms. Youn took the role, saying she could use the money to redo her living room.  She once performed the role of a spiteful queen in a Korean soap opera so well that people often cursed when they saw her on the street.  ''People like her because they know her life story,'' said Huh Eun, a retired college media professor in Seoul. ''When they think of her, they don't think of the glorious spotlight usually associated with film stars, but of a woman who has struggled to make a living all these years like the rest of us.''  Ms. Youn's global breakthrough came when she was offered a role in ''Minari.''  As the news of her award hit on Monday morning, fellow actresses and female fans in South Korea flooded social media with their favorite dry humor from Ms. Youn.  ''I am 67 this year and this is my first time being 67,'' the actress Kim Hye-soo quoted Ms. Youn as saying. ''This is our first time living this life, so we can't help but feel regretful and hurt.''  Ms. Youn's Oscar acceptance speech went viral for a characteristic tongue-in-cheek attitude. The award was presented by Brad Pitt, whose production company financed the film. ''Mr. Brad Pitt, finally, nice to meet you!'' she said to the American superstar. ''Where were you when we were filming in Tulsa?''  ''Minari'' depicts a Korean family struggling to build a life as farmers in rural Arkansas in the 1980s, when many poor Koreans headed for the United States for a better life. It is the second film about Koreans to make history at the Academy Awards, after ''Parasite,'' directed by Bong Joon Ho, won four Oscars last year.  ''Parasite'' grossed more than 10 million viewers within two months of its release. Part of the reason ''Minari'' failed to achieve the same commercial success in South Korea is because the immigrant experience of the 1980s that it portrays is quickly fading.  These days, far fewer Koreans emigrate to the United States, and those who do are usually the children of rich families who go there to study. That may change, too, as Koreans watch hate crimes involving Asian-American victims soar in the United States.  But Ms. Youn struck a chord with South Koreans in her role as Soonja, the foul-mouthed but loving grandmother in ''Minari'' who moves from South Korea to the United States to take care of her grandchildren. Her grandson doesn't consider Soonja a ''real grandma'' and complains that she ''smells like Korea.'' They slowly build a bond by playing cards together and sharing Mountain Dew, which Soonja seems to think is a health drink because it is made from ''dew from the mountains.''  After ''Minari'' began accumulating awards at film festivals in recent weeks, fans started calling Ms. Youn ''the Meryl Streep of Korea.'' She has done what no other Korean actor or actress has done: while ''Parasite'' won best picture and best director, none of its actors were nominated for Oscars.  On Sunday night during the award ceremony, Ms. Youn said her true inspiration was her two children. ''I'd like to thank my two boys who made me go out and work,'' she said while holding her statuette.  ''This is the result because mommy worked so hard.''  Yuh-Jung Youn won an Academy Award for her role in ''Minari.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER ASH LEE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004t "
15		"    Best and Worst Moments of a Muted Night  By The new_york_times 2,459 words 27 April 2021   5     In between a cinematic entrance and a letdown of an ending, there were breakthroughs, heartbreaks and a wolf howl. It was a strange night.  The 93rd Academy Awards were already shaping up to be unusual -- delayed because of the pandemic and featuring movies that, for the most part, bypassed theaters for streaming. Then the producers, including Steven Soderbergh and Stacey Sher, were asked to shake up the show. That they did, setting it at Union Station in downtown Los Angeles and upending the order of awards so that best picture was announced earlier than usual and best actor was the last to be revealed. While ''Nomadland'' won best picture as pundits predicted, hopes were high for a sweep by actors of color, only to be dashed late in the evening.  All told, it was one of the odder Oscar nights in memory. Here are the highs and lows as we saw them.  Most Cinematic Entrance  The opening set expectations high: The camera followed the first presenter, Regina King, making her way through the depot in a long, tracking shot that continued to trail her as she wound through the banquet-style tables, surrounded by guests who had all been coronavirus-tested, tested and tested again, for good measure. King, whose directorial debut, ''One Night in Miami,'' was nominated for three Oscars, served as a tour guide to a scene that almost made us forget we were in the middle of a pandemic. -- Sarah Bahr  Most Unexpected Trendsetters  On the red, er pink, carpet, it was the men who raised the bar: Colman Domingo in tone-on-tone hot pink, Leslie Odom Jr. in all gold (really channeling the statuette there), and Paul Raci in all black. Including the nails. -- Vanessa Friedman  Most Ambitious Dressers  Both Carey Mulligan, nominated for best actress for ''Promising Young Woman,'' and Andra Day, nominated in the same category for ''The United States vs. Billie Holiday,'' tried to manifest an Oscar win in gold. Take home a statuette or just dress like one. -- Vanessa Friedman  Biggest Breakthroughs  This year's Academy Award nominees were historically among the event's more diverse lineups: Seventy women earned nods across 23 categories, and nine people of color were nominated for their acting. And that led to a few history-making victories:  Chloé Zhao, the Chinese-born filmmaker behind ''Nomadland,'' was the first woman of color to win -- and to be nominated -- for best director. (As a producer of ''Nomadland,'' Zhao also won best picture.)  Yuh-Jung Youn, named best supporting actress for her turn as the wry grandmother in ''Minari,'' was the first Korean actor to win an Oscar.  Mia Neal and Jamika Wilson, who worked on ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' were the first Black women to win best makeup and hairstyling (and to be nominated for the category). ''I know that one day it won't be unusual or groundbreaking,'' Neal said in her acceptance speech. ''It will just be normal.''  Anthony Hopkins, at 83, became the oldest actor to win best actor. He won for his performance as a man suffering from dementia in ''The Father.''  Ann Roth, who won for the costume designs in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' became the oldest woman to ever be awarded an Oscar. She is 89.  And finally, a losing streak: Glenn Close, nominated for supporting actress for ''Hillbilly Elegy,'' hit a less exciting milestone: After eight fruitless nods, she has tied the record held by Peter O'Toole for most acting nominations without a win. -- Nancy Coleman  Best Curveball Acceptance Speech  After Daniel Kaluuya took home his first statuette, for best supporting actor for his turn in ''Judas and the Black Messiah,'' his mother probably anticipated he would acknowledge her. But not quite like this. ''It's incredible,'' he said, after expressing gratitude to God, his family and supporters back home in London. ''My mom and dad, they had sex. It's amazing, man. I'm here. So, I'm happy to be alive.'' His mother and sister were watching from London, and the cameras showed their reactions change in real time from teary pride to a confused ''What did he just say?'' expression and head-in-hands mortification. -- Sarah Bahr  Best All-Around Acceptance Speech  Yuh-Jung Youn already gave one of awards season's best speeches when she accepted her BAFTA award weeks ago and said it was all the more meaningful coming from British voters, ''a very snobbish people.'' At the Academy Awards, when she won the supporting-actress Oscar for playing the grandmother in ''Minari,'' Youn brought that same comic energy and then some. Greeting the presenter Brad Pitt, a producer on ''Minari,'' she cracked, ''Mr. Brad Pitt, finally nice to meet you! Where were you when we were filming?'' The speech that ensued was both heartfelt -- ''This is because Mommy worked so hard,'' she told her family -- and funny, as Youn mused to her fellow nominees, ''Tonight I'm luckier than you. And also maybe it's American hospitality for the Korean actor?'' In an awfully dry ceremony, Youn was a godsend. -- Kyle Buchanan  Most Heartbreaking Speech  Thomas Vinterberg, the director of the best international feature winner, ''Another Round,'' grabbed the audience by the throat with a heartbreaking speech that belied the joy captured in his film. Vinterberg dedicated the victory to his daughter Ida, who was killed by a distracted driver shortly after production began. She was 19 and had been slated to appear in the movie. ''We wanted to make a film that celebrates life,'' Vinterberg said onstage. ''And four days into shooting, the impossible happened. An accident on a highway took my daughter away -- someone looking into a cellphone. And we miss her, and I love her.''  He explained that two months before the shoot, she had sent him a letter ''glowing with excitement'' about the project. He added, ''We ended up making this movie for her, as her monument. So, Ida, this is a miracle that just happened. And you're a part of this miracle. Maybe you've been pulling some strings somewhere, I don't know.'' -- Nicole Sperling  Most Heartfelt Speech  For 16 years, ever since his ''Diary of a Mad Black Woman'' arrived with a box office thunderclap, Hollywood has been underestimating Tyler Perry and his work. Actually, scrap that -- looking down its nose at Tyler Perry would be more accurate. On Sunday, the snooty film establishment acknowledged as much, choosing Perry to receive one of two honorary Oscars.  In a surprise to some people in the cinema capital (but not to anyone who has been paying attention to him all these years), Perry delivered a tour-de-force acceptance speech. ''My mother taught me to refuse hate -- she taught me to refuse blanket judgment,'' he said. ''I refuse to hate someone because they are Mexican or because they are Black or white or L.G.B.T.Q. I refuse to hate someone because they are a police officer. I refuse to hate someone because they are Asian.''  He dedicated the award ''to anyone who wants to stand in the middle, no matter what's around the walls. Stand in the middle, because that's where healing happens. That's where conversation happens. That's where change happens.'' -- Brooks Barnes  Most Pressing Concern  Regina King alluded to the Derek Chauvin verdict in her opening remarks. ''Two Distant Strangers,'' a live-action short about a white police officer killing a Black man, won the Oscar in its category. Tyler Perry delivered a moving speech in which he urged Americans to ''refuse hate.''  And to introduce the ceremony's ''In Memoriam'' segment, Angela Bassett insisted on acknowledging lives lost both to the coronavirus pandemic, and to the ''violence of inequality, injustice, hatred, racism and poverty.''  In ways big and small, America's continued reckoning with racial justice reverberated throughout the ceremony.  ''I know that a lot of you people at home want to reach for your remote when you feel like Hollywood is preaching to you,'' King said to start the show.  But almost three hours later, performers and others given a chance to speak had managed to get a message across anyway.  ''In 2020, we were united by loss,'' Bassett said before the ''In Memoriam'' segment played. She noted that more than 3 million had died from Covid around the world, and added, ''Considering the enormity of our collective loss, and the often incomprehensible times we're living through, we wish to also acknowledge those precious lives lost to the violence of inequality, injustice, hatred, racism and poverty.'' She added, ''To all of those who left our lives too soon, we cherish the moments that we had the honor of having with you.'' -- Matt Stevens  Best Spokeswoman for the Movies  This year's Oscars had splashy promos for ''West Side Story'' and ''In the Heights'' intended to convey the message that hey, the movies are back. But only one winner onstage seemed to make a full-throated plea for audiences to re-engage with the big screen.  In her role as a producer of ''Nomadland,'' Frances McDormand accepted the film's best picture award while pitching the theatrical experience both to viewers and her colleagues, an acknowledgment of just how tough things have been for the industry.  ''Please, watch our movie on the largest screen possible,'' she said. ''And one day, very, very soon, take everyone you know into a theater, shoulder to shoulder, in that dark space, and watch every film that is represented here tonight.''  For an evening that felt like a muted celebration -- at best -- this moment stood out more than a Spielberg trailer could. -- Mekado Murphy  Most Considerate Animal Impression  The award for best picture was announced before the top acting prizes, not at the end of the night as it usually is. So the team behind ''Nomadland'' didn't go in with the kind of show-capping momentum normally afforded to best-picture acceptance speeches. Luckily, they had Frances McDormand there to create a climactic moment: She let out a guttural wolf howl before the group walked offstage. The howl was a tribute to Michael Wolf Snyder, the film's production sound mixer, who died in March. McDormand turned her face away from the microphone as she began howling, a great kindness to whoever was at the Oscars sound-mixing board. -- Gabe Cohn  Best Achievement in Presenting  ''Borat Subsequent Moviefilm'' didn't win the Oscar for best adapted screenplay (that went to Florian Zeller and Christopher Hampton for ''The Father''). Nonetheless, there should be an award for pulling off the announcement of the ''Borat'' nomination.  ''OK, here we go,'' the presenter Regina King said, taking a breath before reading the list of the nine screenwriters who worked on the film and who were represented on five separate video feeds, one from Sydney, another from London and the remaining nominees scattered throughout the audience at Union Station. If that wasn't enough, King then read the film's entire title: ''Borat Subsequent Moviefilm: Delivery of Prodigious Bribe to American Regime for Make Benefit Once Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan.'' King received well-deserved applause after that, the entire affair a seeming movie production in and of itself. -- Mekado Murphy  Worst Timing for a Funny Bit  Well into the show's third hour, the producers staged their first genuine comedy bit of the night: a music quiz in which Lil Rel Howery asked stars about songs that were Oscar-nominated, Oscar-winning or Oscar-ignored. The players included Daniel Kaluuya, Andra Day and Glenn Close. It seemed like a lot to ask of Close, who had already lost a record-tying eighth nomination, but she was game for a challenge about ''Da Butt,'' a go-go hit from ''School Daze,'' even demonstrating the dance to everyone's delight. If only the bit hadn't arrived when the show was already running late, prolonging the strange evening even more. -- Stephanie Goodman  Best Telecast Tweak  If nothing else, this Oscars proved that bloat does not come from overly long acceptance speeches: It comes from everything else. Sans a monologue, musical performances and cavernous venue, it turns out there's plenty of time for winners to say pretty much whatever they want! The acceptance speeches are the show, and in this more-focused ceremony, winners having a little more time to say what was on their minds felt right. -- Margaret Lyons  Worst Telecast Tweak  Usually awards shows run clips of nominated performances, offer glimpses of the hair and makeup, give us a taste of the shorts. Not so here; the ceremony included scenes from the international feature, animated feature, documentary feature and best picture categories, but that was it. (They played snippets of the nominated songs, too, but they weren't really clips from the movies.) The clips have a purpose, and their absence meant not only did we miss out on little samples of all the movies, but also that the first hour or so of the show lacked texture. Biographical tidbits are nice, but we need clips, too! Free the clip! -- Margaret Lyons  Weirdest Ending  It felt like walking out of the arena after a 10-time state champion in basketball sinks a last-second shot to beat an underdog in overtime. The producers decided the best-actor category should take the final slot of the night this year, instead of best picture, then Anthony Hopkins (''The Father'') upset Chadwick Boseman and the Oscars just ... ended. Hopkins wasn't even at the ceremony to accept, and the credits rolled on a shellshocked theater. Boseman, who died of cancer in August at age 43, had been nominated for his final film appearance, in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom.'' It was a performance that had been honored all awards season (there were wins at the Golden Globes and other ceremonies), and his victory seemed a given until recent days when pundits started reporting a surge in interest in Hopkins. But there was no Hollywood ending here. -- Sarah Bahr  Regina King, above, opened the 93rd Academy Awards with a winding entrance through Union Station in Los Angeles. Thomas Vinterberg, near right, hit an emotional note by dedicating his international feature award to his daughter Ida, who died during the production of ''Another Round.'' Chloé Zhao, center, took home two awards for ''Nomadland'' and was the first woman of color to win for best director, and Yuh-Jung Youn, the best supporting actress who played a grandmother in ''Minari,'' was the first Korean actor to win. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ABC; CHRIS PIZZELLO); Colman Domingo and Andra Day. (POOL  BY CHRIS PIZZELLO)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004q "
16		"    SiriusXM Deal Is Latest Podcast Salvo  By Reggie Ugwu  1,513 words 27 April 2021   1     The deal, for one of the industry's earliest success stories, is the latest salvo in an era of rapid consolidation.  Roman Mars's ''99% Invisible,'' a hit podcast about the hidden influence of design and architecture that helped solidify resurgent interest in narrative audio when it premiered in 2010, has a new home. SiriusXM, the satellite radio provider, has acquired Mars's company, 99% Invisible Inc., which is responsible for the podcast, its various spinoffs -- including the limited series ''Articles of Interest'' and ''According to Need'' -- and a best-selling book, ''The 99% Invisible City,'' released last year.  The deal -- which will be announced Monday, its terms not disclosed -- will bring Mars and his 13 employees under the banner of Stitcher, the podcast platform that SiriusXM acquired last year for $325 million. Mars and his team will produce new shows and other projects for the company, which is also home to the popular podcasts ''Conan O'Brien Needs a Friend,'' ''Office Ladies'' and ''The Sporkful.''  In an interview last week, Mars characterized the sale as an attempt to free himself from administrative duties and to secure greater resources for his staff. And he expressed fatigue and anxiety over rapid changes to the podcast industry, which in recent years has become a battleground for tech giants like Apple, Spotify and Amazon.  ''What does it mean that Facebook is getting into audio? Or that Apple is changing the 'subscribe' button to a 'follow' button? I don't know and I don't want to figure it out,'' Mars said. ''I feel at sea in this business in a way that I haven't up to this point. Everyone is trying to crack this question of how to get people to pay for premium audio. But one of the things I liked about Sirius was they were like, 'We already did that a decade ago and make $8 billion a year.' They'd already figured it out.''  Megan Liberman, head of talk and entertainment programming at SiriusXM (and a former editor at The new_york_times), said that ''99% Invisible,'' which has been downloaded more than 500 million times, would become a ''foundational'' part of Stitcher and boost the company's efforts to lure top podcast creators.  ''We want the best creative talent that's out there to know that we are a friendly home for them,'' she said.  Under the new arrangement, ''99% Invisible'' will remain available at no cost on all platforms supported by ads. But the parties may explore exclusive partnerships for some products down the line. In addition to a large catalog of free podcasts that are available on all platforms, Stitcher sells a premium service offering special features from podcasts it has a relationship with -- including ad-free listening, early access and bonus content -- for $4.99 per month.  The deal is the latest in a wave of acquisitions targeting high-profile podcasters as overall listenership has surged. An estimated 80 million Americans now listen to podcasts at least once per week, according to Edison Research, a figure that has more than doubled in the last five years.  Big tech and media companies have fueled the spending spree. Spotify has spent about $1 billion on podcast companies in recent years, buying Gimlet Media, Bill Simmons's The Ringer network, and ''The Joe Rogan Experience,'' among others, while Amazon paid a reported $300 million last year for Wondery, maker of hits like ''Dirty John'' and ''Dr. Death.''  SiriusXM is among a handful of established radio companies who are looking to secure their footing amid the rise of new audio. iHeartMedia previously acquired Stuff Media (''Stuff You Should Know,'' ''Atlanta Monster'') and has launched several podcasts with stars like Will Ferrell and Paris Hilton. Entercom, the radio conglomerate that recently rebranded as Audacy, picked up Pineapple Street Media (''Wind of Change,'' ''Missing Richard Simmons'') and Cadence13 (Crooked Media, the Goop podcast) two years ago.  The consolidation of the industry has put pressure on smaller, independent companies, who compete with the big players for all-important advertising dollars. The ad market for podcasts is still relatively small, with $708 million in revenues for 2019, according to the Interactive Advertising Bureau. (For comparison, earnings for social media ads that same year were nearly $36 billion.) But it's growing fast -- the 2019 figure represented a 48 percent increase from the year before, and total revenues are expected to exceed $1 billion this year for the first time.  For Mars, 46, giving up his company's independence is a major professional and philosophical pivot. Joining SiriusXM means leaving Radiotopia -- a network of creator-owned podcasts Mars co-founded with the public media company PRX in 2014 -- which he has regularly championed in the credits of ''99% Invisible'' as the home of ''the best, most innovative shows in all of podcasting.'' Mars said he will give $1 million of the money he is earning from the sale of his company to support the rest of the Radiotopia roster, which includes smaller but well-known podcasts like ''Criminal'' and ''Song Exploder.''  ''I've been devoted to independent podcasting for a really long time, and I still believe that there's a role for that in the world,'' Mars said. ''But my role right now is something different, which is to spend more time on the show and on making things that I love.''  Entrepreneurship was far from the plan when Mars began working in radio in the late 1990s. A former teenage science whiz, he was in his early twenties when he abandoned a Ph.D in genetics and took an unpaid internship at KALW in San Francisco.  After several years of working as a producer and sound designer, he was approached by the station in 2010 to develop a one-minute radio segment about architecture, a subject with which he had become enamored during a stretch spent living in Chicago. Mars asked for four-and-a-half minutes, and the segment, inserted into the local news section of NPR's ''Morning Edition,'' became an early testing ground for what would turn into ''99% Invisible.''  ''It was a culmination of everything I wanted to do on a show,'' Mars said. ''I wanted a little bit of 'Radiolab,' a little bit of 'Memory Palace,' a little bit of Benjamin Walker's 'Theory of Everything,' a little bit of James Brooks's 'Connections.' As a subject, design had already been picked apart in lots of ways. But I really wanted to focus on the problem-solving aspect and the stories behind these objects that we encounter in the world.''  Early episodes included an interview with an acoustic designer and a meditation from the producer Katie Mingle on the golden age of suburban cul-de-sacs.  It took a while for the show to find its place. Mars pitched the segment to several other public radio stations and received little interest. Undeterred, he tried posting episodes to a Tumblr page before a friend convinced him to turn the show into a podcast.  At the time, the medium had yet to go mainstream, with few shows reaching an audience of more than a million listeners. But one of them, ''Radiolab,'' happened to be hosted by a fan of Mars's, Jad Abumrad, who featured an episode of ''99% Invisible'' on his show in 2011.  ''Our audience growth after that looked like a hockey stick,'' Mars said. ''There weren't so many great podcasts back then, and we could see that people were just going through our archive and downloading everything.''  A Kickstarter campaign to finance a new season of the show the following year became the most successful journalism project in the site's history at the time, raising over $180,000 in 30 days. Since then, the show has become increasingly ambitious.  Mingle spent two years reporting ''According to Need,'' a limited series released last year that investigated Oakland's homelessness crisis. Earlier this year, the show partnered with Warner Bros. to create an original podcast inspired by the film ''Judas and the Black Messiah.'' Another spinoff, ''Articles of Interest,'' in which its creator, Avery Trufelman, applied a sociological lens to fashion design, was named one of the 10 best podcasts of 2018 by the BBC and The New Yorker.  With the backing of Stitcher and SiriusXM, Mars said he hoped to continue producing ambitious work -- without the strain of handling the financing himself.  ''With a bigger company, I can do more things and not be fettered by the small business mentality,'' he said. ''Hustle less and make more.''  ''My role right now is something different, which is to spend more time on the show and on making things that I love,'' said Roman Mars, the founder of the podcast ''99% Invisible.'' (C1); In a changing podcast industry, Roman Mars sold ''99% Invisible'' to free himself from administrative burdens and get greater resources for his staff. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AUBREY TRINNAMAN FOR THE new_york_times) (C6)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003m "
17		"    Family Sees Snippet of Video in Police Shooting  By Richard Fausset  1,493 words 27 April 2021   16     The family of Andrew Brown Jr. watched a snippet of his final moments, but that hasn't stopped the demands to publicly release body camera footage of the fatal shooting.  ELIZABETH CITY, N.C. -- Despite appeals from the governor and other elected leaders, community activists and the family of a man who was killed by sheriff's deputies, the authorities in a North Carolina coastal county had not publicly released body camera footage of the deadly encounter as of Monday evening.  Days of demands for the footage continued after family members of the man, Andrew Brown Jr., and one of their lawyers were shown a 20-second snippet of Mr. Brown's final moments. The lawyers said the private viewing inside the Pasquotank County government building on Monday afternoon amounted to a sliver of the footage that must exist of last week's shooting.  What the video did show, said Chantel Cherry-Lassiter, the lawyer who watched with the family, was the ''execution'' of Mr. Brown, 42, who she said was sitting inside his car, hands ''firmly on the wheel,'' when the gunfire began.  Mr. Brown, who was Black, did not appear to be holding a weapon and was driving away from the deputies when they continued shooting, she said, while trying to arrest him on a drug warrant on Wednesday morning.  In an impassioned news conference after seeing the video, Ms. Cherry-Lassiter and other lawyers for the family decried the lack of transparency, saying the footage was only from one body camera when there were several deputies on the scene. Seven deputies were placed on administrative leave after the shooting.  Ms. Cherry-Lassiter's description of the footage offered the closest glimpse yet of a fatal shooting that took place one day after a Minnesota jury found a former police officer guilty of murder in the death of another Black man, George Floyd.  It also came on the heels of several other police killings, including the shooting deaths of Adam Toledo, 13, in Chicago and Ma'Khia Bryant, 16, in Columbus, Ohio.  In North Carolina, the fact that the videos have not yet been made public has become a key source of anger for protesters who have spent days peacefully filling the streets of Elizabeth City, a historic town of about 18,000 people on the Pasquotank River, about an hour's drive south of Norfolk, Va. Officials in Elizabeth City and surrounding Pasquotank County issued emergency declarations on Monday morning, citing a potential for ''a period of civil unrest'' whenever the footage was publicly released.  Sheriff Tommy Wooten II of Pasquotank County, who has faced calls to resign from the local N.A.A.C.P., has said that he supports releasing the videos. Late Monday afternoon, he released a short videotaped message in which he was flanked by Chief Deputy Daniel Fogg, who said that the county attorney had filed a petition for the release of the videos.  ''This tragic incident was quick and over in less than 30 seconds,'' Sheriff Wooten said in the video, ''and body cameras are shaky and sometimes hard to decipher. They only tell part of the story.''  News media outlets also filed a legal action in an effort to have the footage released, but their lawyer, Michael J. Tadych, said on Monday that he was not sure when his case would receive a hearing.  Under North Carolina law, police body camera videos can only be released to the public with the approval of a judge. Anybody, including the news media, a police department or a citizen, can request the release of a video, though certain stakeholders can object to its release or ask for sections to be blurred, said Frayda Bluestein, a professor of public law and government at the University of North Carolina.  Ms. Bluestein said the current system, which began in 2016, was meant to give equal voice to law enforcement officials, citizens and journalists, who may have conflicting concerns about what videos should be released, and whether to redact them.  A bill introduced in the state legislature seeks to change that, and would force law enforcement agencies to release body camera video upon request within 48 hours of the recording. A person or agency could object in that scenario, in which case a judge would review the objections.  In contrast, other jurisdictions have recently been quick to release body camera videos, particularly as interest in police violence has mounted and calls for transparency within police departments have become more fervent. In the case of Ms. Bryant, officials made some body camera footage available the same day. In Virginia, officials released the video of Isaiah Brown, a 32-year-old Black man who was shot by the police, two days after the encounter.  At the news conference on Monday, Ms. Cherry-Lassiter said the footage she and the family saw showed Mr. Brown behind the wheel of his car in his driveway, a sheriff's vehicle blocking his exit and deputies surrounding him. ''They run up to his vehicle shooting,'' she said. Mr. Brown backed up, away from the officers. ''It was at no time in the 20 seconds that we saw that he was threatening the officers in any kind of way,'' she said.  She said deputies shot at Mr. Brown's car as he drove away, running behind him until he hit a nearby tree.  ''It's just messed up how this happened,'' said Khalil Ferebee, Mr. Brown's son, who viewed the footage multiple times. ''He got executed. It ain't right. It ain't right at all.''  The Sheriff's Office has released scant details about the shooting, which is being investigated by the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation.  The slaying shook residents of Mr. Brown's neighborhood, a clutch of small, older houses set between two cemeteries a few blocks south of the downtown riverfront. On Sunday night, children zipped down streets on bicycles and played basketball as parents grilled or sat on their porches.  A number of neighbors said they knew Mr. Brown, and they described him as a kind man who was fond of a good joke. He had attended a local high school, where he had played football. They said he had several children, and had brought no trouble to the neighborhood.  According to court documents, sheriff's deputies had a warrant to search Mr. Brown's house for drugs and evidence of drug trafficking. A confidential source working with a narcotics task force in nearby Dare County had recently recorded illicit purchases from Mr. Brown, according to the search warrant application, which said authorities were ''familiar'' with Mr. Brown and knew him to be a ''source of supply of 'crack' cocaine, cocaine, heroin/fentanyl and methamphetamine.''  Mr. Brown had two pending criminal cases, court records show, on charges of possessing drugs and drug paraphernalia.  Demetria Williams, 48, a shipyard worker who lives down the street from Mr. Brown, said she heard a commotion on Wednesday morning and ran toward Mr. Brown's house, where she saw his BMW sedan driving away from deputies. ''By the time I got down there they were standing behind him shooting at the car because he was trying to get away.''  After the car smashed into a crepe myrtle a few yards from Mr. Brown's house, she said, they took him out of the car and began chest compressions. ''And I guess they knew they couldn't revive him,'' she said, ''so they put a sheet over his body.''  Three deputies then used a battering ram to break into his house, she said.  Michael Anthony Gordon Sr., a retired brick mason and heavy equipment operator, did not see the shooting but arrived home a few hours later. There, he found the BMW against the crepe myrtle tree in his yard, with Mr. Brown's body nearby.  On Sunday night, Mr. Gordon, 61, pointed to a bullet hole in the vinyl siding of his house, which he said came from the police shooting. The bullet entered his kitchen and hit a crockpot, he said. Faint stains on the sidewalk near the tree were the traces of Mr. Brown's blood, he said, and there were still shards of the car wedged into the trunk.  He reflected on the shooting and said it was seriously irresponsible. If Mr. Brown was fleeing the scene, he wondered, why shoot him? ''If they found him the first time, they could have found him again, another day,'' he said, adding, ''To me it was just senseless.''  Will Wright contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy contributed research.  Will Wright contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy contributed research.  Relatives of Andrew Brown Jr. on Monday. Mr. Brown was fatally shot last Wednesday by sheriff's deputies in Elizabeth City, N.C. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TRAVIS LONG/THE NEWS & OBSERVER, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004i "
18		"    In Praise of Fauci and Other Public Servants  1,025 words 27 April 2021   22     Readers hail him as a hero, and say there are other dedicated people like him in government. Also: Calibrating vaccine doses; grief; liability insurance for police officers; organizing a closet.  To the Editor:  Re ''We Owe Fauci Gratitude, Not Grief,'' by Frank Bruni (column, April 25):  Dr. Anthony Fauci is my hero in this Covid pandemic. He is the bobblehead that I proudly display on my bookshelf. I agree completely with Mr. Bruni in his assessment of the depth and commitment of this truly patriotic public servant.  Dr. Fauci has been the one constant, calm, knowledgeable messenger of scientific facts during our long national nightmare. We Americans have been able to rely on him to tell us the truth and keep us safe regardless of politics and self-serving politicians.  President Biden should award Dr. Fauci the Presidential Medal of Freedom to acknowledge all that he has done for his fellow citizens.  Caren Kalman  Woodland Park, N.J.  To the Editor:  Frank Bruni's call for gratitude is welcome, but the implication that Dr. Anthony Fauci's dedication to public service is unusual is not. While public servants are often denigrated by politicians, business leaders and the press, the federal government is nonetheless replete with dedicated ones.  Living and working in the D.C. metro area, I have many friends, neighbors and colleagues in public service -- people who are not famous, not rich, but expert in what they do and committed to doing it well. Public servants provide Americans with all kinds of things -- from safe food, to regular Social Security checks, to awe-inspiring pictures from a helicopter over Mars, just to name a few.  Dr. Fauci spent most of his long years of public service unknown to the public, but still making important contributions to public health. Dr. Fauci's fame makes him unusual, but his dedication to public service does not. We should be grateful that we have so many like him.  Maureen Conway  Takoma Park, Md.  Lower Vaccine Doses for Some People?  To the Editor:  I read with interest ''Vaccines May Affect Women Differently'' (news article, April 18). It fails to address what I consider some other important questions concerning weight, dosage and side effects. For example, does one size fit all?  With regard to Covid vaccines, everyone gets the same dose, whether the patient is a 5-foot-2 woman weighing 105 pounds or a 6-foot-4 man weighing 210 pounds. And some individuals are more sensitive to medications than others, and are more likely to suffer side effects (including tinnitus, which I experienced).  I believe in vaccines, and we all hope they are successful, but perhaps there are adaptations that can lower the side effects that some experience. As I learned in nursing school, weight is an important factor that is often used to calculate an appropriate dose of medication, and failure to do so may result in various side effects.  Are considerations for vaccines different than for medications? Can alternative lower dosages be available and administered to those of various weights and sensitivities, especially if they experienced side effects with their first vaccination?  Diane R. Garvey  McLean, Va.  The Effects of Grief  To the Editor:  Re ''The Biology of Grief'' (Well, nytimes.com, April 22):  Now I understand why perhaps, for almost a year after my husband's death, I was intermittently ill, more so than ever before in my life. I even had a deep vein thrombosis, which I never had before.  But one thing above all that I have noticed (after losing my parents, sister and husband): There is no true acceptance of their deaths, only acknowledgment.  Anne Skalitza  Spring Lake, N.J.  Require Liability Insurance for Police Officers  To the Editor:  ''New Police Reform Laws Seize on Calls for Change'' (front page, April 19) details how complex and multilayered policing is in America. Much could be accomplished if federal law simply removed police ''qualified immunity'' and mandated significant individual liability insurance as a condition of employment.  Like needing automobile liability insurance to drive, the police would need liability insurance to work. Insurers will, in their own financial interest, drop dangerous cops. Derek Chauvin, who had a checkered policing career, would have likely lost his insurance and his job long before he knelt on George Floyd's neck.  Driving has been made less dangerous by insurers lobbying for safer cars and safer conditions. They punish dangerous drivers with high premiums and loss of coverage and reward good drivers. The same incentives would work in policing.  Bad cops are expensive. Minneapolis has paid out at least $71 million over the past 15 years to settle claims of officer misconduct. This is likely only a small portion of the actual cost when adding the expense of the protests that bad policing engenders. Insurance would be quite inexpensive by comparison.  Jon Bogle  Williamsport, Pa.  Cleaning Up Your Closet  To the Editor:  Re ''How to Get Your Closet Under Control'' (The Fix, Real Estate, April 4):  I love my clothes and tend to hold on to them for years, so I have plenty of experience trying to find the space for it all, and a system that helps me to find everything.  I've discovered these tricks:  Arrange all the clothes on the rack by color. This makes it easier to choose some old loved piece you may have forgotten about, and identify areas of need.  Store shoes in the original box. Most shoe boxes have a diagram of the shoe shown on one end of the box. I make sure it's visible. You can stack two or three boxes on those shelves, and the shoes are better protected.  Use trouser hangers, the kind with two clips, to attach to knee-high boots, and hang them up. They keep their shape better.  Finally, use those dry-cleaner bags to stuff your purses before putting them on the shelf. You guessed it: They keep their shape better.  Carol Fulghum Silver  Mountain Park, Ga.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Ben Wiseman; photograph via Wikimedia Commons FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003g "
19		"    U.S. to Send 60 Million Vaccine Doses Abroad  By Sheryl Gay Stolberg  1,437 words 27 April 2021   1     President Biden will send up to 60 million doses of AstraZeneca's vaccine to countries pleading for help, but some see a medicine dropper for ''a four-alarm fire.''  WASHINGTON -- President Biden, under intense pressure to do more to address the surging pandemic abroad, including a humanitarian crisis in India, intends to make up to 60 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine available to other countries, so long as federal regulators deem the doses safe, officials said Monday.  The announcement came after Mr. Biden spoke with Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India and the two pledged to ''work closely together in the fight against Covid-19.'' It is a significant, albeit limited, shift for the White House, which has until now been reluctant to make excess doses of coronavirus vaccine available in large amounts.  Global health groups said the commitment was not nearly big enough. And it comes with a catch: The AstraZeneca doses were made at a Baltimore plant, owned by Emergent BioSolutions, where production has been halted amid fears of contamination. As part of a continuing safety review of the plant, the Food and Drug Administration will have to certify that the doses meet the United States' standards for safety and quality.  Mr. Biden took office vowing to restore the United States as a leader in global public health, and he has taken certain steps to do so: rejoining the World Health Organization, pledging $4 billion to an international vaccine effort and providing financial support to help Biological E, a vaccine manufacturer in India, produce at least one billion doses of coronavirus vaccines by the end of 2022.  But on the matter of sending vaccines abroad that were manufactured for the United States and funded by American taxpayers, the president has been consistent: He will help other countries, he has said, but only after every American has had a chance to get a coronavirus shot. (He made a limited exception for Mexico and Canada last month.)  Now, with some states on the verge of reporting that their vaccine supplies exceed demand, the American vaccination campaign is at an inflection point, and the president appears more willing to consider sending surplus doses overseas. That may be especially true of the vaccine made by AstraZeneca, which is not authorized for use in the United States.  More than a year into the pandemic, as infections are beginning to ebb domestically, the coronavirus continues to sweep across the globe. The devastation is hardly limited to India. Brazil, which has had one of the world's highest death tolls from Covid-19, now faces a hunger epidemic. In Turkey, which ranks fourth in the world in new daily cases per person, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has ordered a three-week national lockdown, closing nonessential businesses and sending all students home.  Given the scope of the crisis, liberals on Capitol Hill and global health advocacy organizations say the president has a moral obligation to do more. Mr. Modi pressed the president in their call on Monday to ease patent and intellectual property controls on pharmaceuticals, a cause liberals have also championed as they accuse Mr. Biden of kowtowing to pharmaceutical companies and their profits.  ''Sixty million doses -- that's showing up to a four-alarm fire with an eyedropper full of water,'' said Asia Russell, the executive director of Health GAP, a global AIDS treatment advocacy organization. Citing an interview Mr. Biden gave to the health activist Ady Barkan, she said he had promised in his campaign ''that intellectual property rights would not stand in the way of access to a successful Covid-19 vaccine.''  Senior Biden administration officials, asked by a reporter on Monday whether they had a ''moral obligation'' to ease the patent restrictions, said they had no new information to share. But Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, defended the president's response.  ''The United States has been one of the largest providers of assistance to address the Covid pandemic around the world, including to India, and we have obviously taken some significant steps over the last couple of days to address their immediate needs,'' Ms. Psaki said.  The situation in India is especially dire. The country is experiencing what may be the worst crisis any nation has seen since the pandemic began. Hospitals are overflowing, and desperate patients are dying as they wait to see doctors. On Monday, India broke the world record for daily coronavirus infections for a fifth consecutive day, reporting nearly 353,000 new cases. And it added 2,812 deaths to its overall toll of more than 195,000, which experts say is likely to be a vast undercount.  ''The crisis in India is a humanitarian disaster unfolding before our eyes,'' said Tom Hart, the acting chief executive of the ONE campaign, a nonprofit dedicated to eradicating world poverty. Based on an analysis of contracts signed by Mr. Biden's most recent predecessor, the group estimates that the federal government has secured 550 million more doses than it needs to cover every American.  With worrisome variants spreading in the United States and around the world, public health experts say vaccinating people overseas is not only a moral imperative, but it is essential to protecting Americans. J. Stephen Morrison, the director of the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said Mr. Biden needed to offer a more sweeping vision of how the United States can help the world.  ''We are approaching these colossal, complex problems in an ad hoc, reactive, short-term manner,'' Mr. Morrison said. He called the announcement on Monday a ''further incremental step by the Biden administration toward fuller engagement internationally to address the dire vaccine gap.''  On a conference call with reporters on Monday, senior Biden administration officials said that in addition to the money pledged to the international vaccine initiative, known as Covax, the administration intended to spend $11.5 billion, appropriated by Congress as part of the $1.9 trillion stimulus package, on helping other countries fight the pandemic and administer vaccines.  But the officials would not address questions about patent waivers on vaccines developed by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna using sophisticated biotech methods. The Moderna vaccine was developed in partnership with the federal government.  The announcement on Monday about the AstraZeneca vaccine came only a day after the administration unveiled a series of steps to help India, including easing the way for the export of raw materials to make vaccine, and supplying that country with therapeutics, rapid diagnostic test kits, ventilators and personal protective gear.  Tim Manning, the White House Covid-19 supply coordinator, explained the plan on Monday on Twitter, writing that the administration had ''diverted our pending orders of vaccine filters to India's vaccine manufacturing effort,'' which would ''help India make more vaccine.''  But whether -- or when -- the AstraZeneca doses will reach India is unclear. Administration officials would not commit to giving them to any particular country. Ms. Psaki said that about 10 million doses could be released ''in the coming weeks'' if the Food and Drug Administration approved the vaccines made at the Baltimore plant, and that another 50 million doses were in various stages of production.  ''Right now we have zero doses available of AstraZeneca,'' Ms. Psaki said.  The new_york_times has reported extensively on problems at the plant, which had to throw out millions of doses of AstraZeneca's vaccine from October to January, and it later discarded up to 15 million doses of the vaccine developed by Johnson & Johnson, also because of concerns about possible contamination.  AstraZeneca's vaccine -- unlike those of Pfizer, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson -- has also not been granted emergency use authorization by the Food and Drug Administration. In announcing that they would release it, Biden administration officials were effectively conceding that they would not need the vaccine here in the United States.  Last month, Mr. Biden released a total of four million doses of AstraZeneca's vaccine to Canada and Mexico -- a move that generated controversy last week when the company disclosed that the doses had been made at the Emergent plant.  The president said last week that he was considering sending more overseas: ''We're looking at what is going to be done with some of the vaccines that we are not using,'' he said. ''We've got to make sure they are safe to be sent.''  Covid-19 patients waiting on the street to receive oxygen treatment in Delhi on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00045 "
20		"    U.S. Recognition of Armenian Genocide  390 words 27 April 2021   22     Readers say it has always been a matter of human rights, not politics, and highlight the continuing problem of Turkish intimidation.  To the Editor:  Re ''Biden Recognizes Ottoman-Era Massacre of Armenians as Genocide'' (news article, April 25):  I am a first-generation Armenian-American and grandson of survivors of the Armenian genocide. President Biden's recognition of mass killings of Armenians more than a century ago as a genocide was long overdue.  For decades, politicians from both parties played politics on this issue in an effort to appease Turkey for geopolitical reasons. But what they failed to understand was that this has never been a political issue, but rather a human rights one. President Biden's statement further underscores that commitment to human rights and in some ways is a rebuke of realpolitik.  While Armenians around the world laud President Biden's actions, our work is not done. Recognition of the Armenian genocide is one step and an inflection point in the long journey in seeking justice, due process and reparations for crimes against humanity that have gone unpunished.  Stephan Pechdimaldji  San Ramon, Calif.  To the Editor:  President Biden took an important step by recognizing as genocide the mass violence against the Armenians of the Ottoman Empire. His recognition of a horrendous chapter of history is courageous in light of the threats of noncooperation in military and economic affairs regularly pronounced by Turkish officials, targeting countries that dare recognize the genocide that occurred in World War I.  It is important given the Turkish government's international and domestic spread of ''alternate truths,'' its pursuit of an Orwellian order. Turkey's leaders back up their disinformation campaign by threats of criminal prosecution against those who dare challenge the state.  Many courageous Turkish intellectuals stood up against such threats, and many paid the price of exile, prison or even death. Their courage is honored by the step President Biden took.  Joachim Savelsberg  St. Paul, Minn.  The writer is the author of ''Knowing About Genocide: Armenian Suffering and Epistemic Struggles.''  A torchlight procession in Yerevan on Friday to mark the 106th anniversary of the massacres in which about 1.5 million ethnic Armenians were killed during World War I. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Karen Minasyan/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003c "
21		"    Fewer Than 10 Million Watched the Oscars  By Brooks Barnes and John Koblin  1,030 words 27 April 2021   3     Sunday night's pandemic-restricted telecast drew 58 percent fewer viewers than last year's record low.  LOS ANGELES -- For the film industry, which was already fighting to hold its place at the center of American culture, the Nielsen ratings for Sunday night's 93rd Academy Awards came as a body blow: About 9.85 million people watched the telecast, a 58 percent plunge from last year's record low.  Among adults 18 to 49, the demographic that many advertisers pay a premium to reach, the Oscars suffered an even steeper 64 percent decline, according to preliminary data from Nielsen released on Monday. Nielsen's final numbers are expected on Tuesday and will include out-of-home viewing and some streaming statistics.  The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences declined to comment.  The academy had been bracing for a sharp ratings drop. Award shows have been struggling mightily during the pandemic, and the Oscars have been on a downward trajectory for years. But some academy officials had hoped Sunday's telecast still might crack 10 million viewers and attract as many as 15 million.  Humiliating? Certainly. But hundreds of millions of dollars are also at stake.  Under a long-term licensing deal with ABC, which is owned by Disney, the academy stands to collect roughly $900 million between 2021 and 2028 for worldwide broadcasting rights to the Oscars. The funds are crucial to the academy's operations, especially when it is spending to open a museum in Los Angeles. But some of that money is threatened. Payments to the academy include a guarantee and then revenue sharing if certain ad sales thresholds are reached.  So far, ABC has been able to keep ad rates high because of the fragmentation of television viewing. Oscars night may be a shadow of its former self, but so is the rest of network television; the ceremony still ranks as one of the largest televised events of the year. Google, General Motors, Rolex and Verizon spent an estimated $2 million for each 30-second spot in Sunday's telecast, only a slight decline from last year's pricing, according to media buyers. ABC said on Thursday that it had sold out of its inventory.  ABC does not guarantee an audience size to Oscar advertisers, thus removing any potential for so-called make-goods (additional commercial time at a later date) to compensate for low ratings.  Some people in the entertainment industry, whether out of optimism or denial or both, believe award shows are going through a temporary downturn -- that declining ratings for stalwarts like the Emmys (a 30-year low) and the Screen Actors Guild Awards (down 52 percent) reflect the pandemic, not a paradigm shift. Without live audiences, the telecasts have been drained of their energy. The big studios also postponed major movies, leaving this year's awards circuit to little-seen art films.  The most-nominated movie on Sunday was ''Mank.'' It received 10 nods. Surveys before the show indicated most Americans had never even heard of it, much less watched it, despite its availability on Netflix. ''Mank,'' a love letter to Old Hollywood from David Fincher, won for production design and cinematography.  Still, the Oscars have been on a slide since 1998, when 57.2 million people tuned in to see ''Titanic'' sweep to best-picture victory.  Many factors have been undercutting the ratings, starting with the delivery route. Old broadcast networks like ABC are no longer that relevant, especially to young people. (One awards show that is growing are the Game Awards, which celebrate the best video games of the year and are streamed on platforms like YouTube, Twitch and Twitter.)  In many cases, analysts say, the telecasts are too long for contemporary attention spans. The ceremony on Sunday was one of the shorter ones in recent years, and it still ran 3 hours 19 minutes. Why slog through all that when you can catch snippets on Twitter? On Sunday, video from the ceremony showing Glenn Close twerking to ''Da Butt'' went viral.  Increasingly, the ceremonies are less about entertainment honors and more about civic issues and progressive politics, which inevitably annoys half the audience. Regina King, a previous Oscar winner and the director of ''One Night in Miami,'' acknowledged as much at the top of the show.  ''I know that a lot of you people at home want to reach for your remote when you feel like Hollywood is preaching to you,'' she said. ''But as the mother of a Black son, I know the fear that so many live with, and no amount of fame or fortune changes that.'' A half-dozen honorees followed her lead and spoke about issues like racial justice and police brutality.  Awards show fatigue is also a factor. There are at least 18 televised ceremonies each year, including the Grammys (down 53 percent) and Golden Globes (down 62 percent). Still, the Oscars ratings plunge in recent years has been more drastic, and the Grammys are closing in on becoming the most-watched awards show, once an inconceivable notion. The Grammys telecast last month had nearly nine million viewers.  The academy itself has played a role in the show's demise, bungling efforts to make it more relevant (hastily announcing a new category honoring achievement in ''popular'' films and then backtracking) and refusing ABC's plea to reduce the number of Oscars presented during the show.  On Sunday, the proceedings were notably subdued -- almost the opposite of a big-tent awards show. The best-song performances were moved to the preshow. Film clips were scaled back. Comedy bits were scant. A lengthy section of the show was dedicated to the Motion Picture & Television Fund, a charity that provides housing and health care for Hollywood seniors.  A spokeswoman for the academy said the producers of the Oscars were not available on Monday to discuss their decisions.  Daniel Kaluuya won the supporting actor Oscar for ''Judas and the Black Messiah'' at a subdued Academy Awards on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Chris Pizzello FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004p "
22		"    Voting Bill Presents Democrats With Quandary  By Astead W. Herndon  1,770 words 27 April 2021   1     In the South, Black Democrats describe a party too slow in combating Republican voting limits. And Black lawmakers are wary that a major elections bill could reduce their power in Congress.  JACKSON, Miss. -- The right to vote is what Frank Figgers fought for in the 1960s as a student at a racially segregated high school in Jackson, Miss. It is what Medgar Evers died for when he was shot to death outside his home in the city in 1963, after his work with the state N.A.A.C.P.  Mr. Figgers, 71, remembers learning about the assassination of Mr. Evers the day it occurred. He remembers the rage it inspired.  ''When people say we're fighting the same stuff, we really are,'' he said, sitting in a local Masonic Lodge where Mr. Evers once held an office. ''We were fighting in 1865 and 1965. We were fighting it in 2015 and we're fighting it in 2021.''  Now, as Republican state lawmakers across the country push new restrictions on voting, Democrats are hitting back. In Congress, the party is pushing a colossal elections system overhaul that would take redistricting out of the hands of politicians, introduce automatic voter registration and restore voting rights for the formerly incarcerated.  For some Black Democrats in the South, the fact that this fight is happening at all -- in 2021 -- is a profound failure of the Democratic Party's politics and policies. In interviews, more than 20 Southern Democrats and civil rights activists described a party that has been slow to combat Republican gerrymandering and voting limits, overconfident about the speed of progress, and too willing to accept that voter suppression was a thing of the Jim Crow past.  But Black leaders are also facing some unexpected resistance from lawmakers who fear that the sweeping bill in Congress, known as the For the People Act, would endanger their own seats in predominantly Black districts.  Republicans have often used the redistricting method to pack Black Democrats into one House district. The practice has diluted Democrats' influence regionally, but it also ensures that almost all Southern states have at least one predominantly Black district, offering a guarantee of Black representation amid a sea of mostly white and conservative House districts.  Some Black Democratic lawmakers in the South have so far remained relatively muted about these concerns of self-preservation, worried that it places their own interests above the party's agenda or activists' priorities. Still, the doubts flared up last month when Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, a Democrat whose district includes Jackson and who serves as Mr. Figgers's congressman, surprisingly voted ''no'' on the House's federal elections bill.  Recently, other Congressional Black Caucus members have urged Democratic leadership to focus more narrowly on the John Lewis Voting Rights Act -- which aims to restore key parts of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, including the requirement that some states get federal approval before changing election laws -- rather than pushing for the sweeping provisions of the For the People Act, officially known as H.R. 1.  Eric H. Holder Jr., who served as attorney general under President Barack Obama, said in a recent interview that Democrats were only now seeking to unify on a strategy, years after Republicans made theirs clear.  ''When it came to redistricting, the Democratic response has not been nearly as polished, not nearly as concentrated, was not technologically backed in the way that the Republicans were,'' he said.  Representative Mondaire Jones of New York, who was a key ally to Speaker Nancy Pelosi as she built support for the legislation, agreed with the sentiment but placed blame on the Obama administration.  ''Democrats absolutely have been late to seeing the urgency of voting rights,'' Mr. Jones said. ''Had they not been late, we would have done something about it during the Obama administration. We needed H.R. 1 then.''  The For the People Act is set to be one of this summer's defining clashes in the Senate. The White House will face pressure from its moderate and progressive flanks, and the act will test Senate Democrats' commitment to the filibuster, the 60-vote threshold that has often stymied legislation in the past.  It remains unclear how far Democrats are willing to go to push through the bill, even after former President Donald J. Trump waged an open war on the results of the last election and as Republicans propose new voter restrictions in more than 40 states. Key Democratic senators like Joe Manchin III, the West Virginia moderate, have expressed skepticism about some parts of the voting bill. The House also has not yet fully passed its companion legislation, the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, or H.R. 4.  To Jackson's tight-knit voting rights community, members of which view themselves as torchbearers in the mold of Mr. Figgers and Mr. Evers, it's all evidence of a lingering absence of urgency.  ''If the people who were most impacted by this were white people, Democrats would've done something about this a long time ago,'' said Rukia Lumumba, the executive director of the People's Advocacy Institute in Jackson. Her brother is the mayor of Jackson and her late father also held that role. ''They thought, 'Oh, that's just the South,' and not that what we've experienced here was coming to the rest of the country.''  Mr. Holder, who now runs a group that focuses on redistricting and ballot access, said he would encourage senators to eliminate the filibuster to pass the For the People Act, if necessary. His group and its partners plan to spend $30 million to pitch the legislation to voters in states with key senators, including Arizona, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.  ''The stakes are the condition of our democracy,'' Mr. Holder said. ''This is more than a partisan 'who wins and who loses?' game. If we are not successful in H.R. 1 or H.R. 4, I am really worried our democracy will be fundamentally and irreparably harmed.''  He added, ''We will still have elections every two years or every four years, but they could almost be rendered close to meaningless.''  Mr. Holder has also found himself acting as something of a voting rights ambassador among Democrats: Last month, on a virtual call with the Congressional Black Caucus, he was brought in because several of the caucus's older members had deep reservations about the For the People Act, according to those familiar with the call's planning, a rare rift between Democratic leadership and the group often called ''the conscience of the Congress.''  In fact, Representative Thompson was the only Democrat to vote against the bill in the House, reversing his stance as a previous co-sponsor. In the weeks since, Mr. Thompson has declined several requests from The new_york_times to explain his vote, or to respond to constituents who say it was at odds with Southern Democrats' rich history of defending Black voting rights.  In a short statement given to Fox News last month, Mr. Thompson said through his office, ''My constituents opposed the redistricting portion of the bill as well as the section on public finances.'' However, in interviews, members of every major civil rights group in Jackson expressed surprise at his vote, even if they remained deferential to his judgment.  ''Of course we noticed that,'' said Arekia Bennett, the executive director of the youth-led group Mississippi Votes. ''But we're not certain on his actual reasons.''  Nsombi Lambright-Haynes, who leads one of the region's top voting rights groups, One Voice, said Mr. Thompson's civil rights record had earned him the benefit of the doubt.  ''We're wary of talking about it because we just assume we don't know the full story,'' she said.  People familiar with Mr. Thompson's thinking who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations said the congressman's vote reflected the larger fear among some Black elected officials that independent redistricting committees would dilute the makeup of predominantly Black districts like his own. Advocates like Mr. Holder say the concerns about keeping Black districts intact are addressed in the bill.  Mr. Jones, who is part of a wave of new congressional lawmakers who have shaken up the Black caucus, said that any worries about how redistricting affects Black districts were not ideological but generational.  ''Congress is a place where members are used to and very comfortable with the status quo, so long as it benefits them electorally,'' he said. ''If we don't have a Democratic majority in the Congress, it wouldn't matter that the Congressional Black Caucus increased its membership to 70.''  In Jackson, meanwhile, the For the People Act could be the difference in restoring voting rights for those disenfranchised because of a previous felony conviction. Groups like One Voice and Mississippi Votes said they were focusing their attention on state voting restrictions, which have proliferated since the Supreme Court's 2013 decision to remove the Voting Rights Act requirement that several states, mostly in the South, earn federal approval before changing election laws.  ''In 2016, when the election results came around, the rest of the country woke up in Mississippi and we woke up to a regular day,'' Ms. Bennett said. ''And so for us, the fight -- whether these bills pass or not -- the fights continue. Because we're in a different war.''  Republicans remain committed to a strategy of enacting voting restrictions through state legislatures. They also have a 10-year head start, given their string of down-ballot successes that continued in 2020.  In Mr. Obama's administration, Democrats ''focused our resources on the presidency, Senate, the House,'' Mr. Holder said. ''We think of ourselves as a national federal party, without necessarily understanding that there's a direct connection between federal power and the makeup of the state legislatures and governors at the state level.''  He added, ''Secretaries of state, Supreme Court races in the states -- you know, there was just not a focus there.''  Ms. Lambright-Haynes paused when told what Mr. Holder had said.  ''It's just really, really sad,'' she said. ''We're not able to not see those things here.''  ''We were fighting in 1865 and 1965,'' Frank Figgers of Jackson, Miss., said of the right to vote.; Nsombi Lambright-Haynes is executive director of One Voice, a voting rights group, in Jackson. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TIMOTHY IVY FOR THE new_york_times); Representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi (POOL  BY JOHN MCDONNELL) (A20)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00046 "
23		"    In Hearing, Most Justices Seem Wary of Donor Disclosure Requirement for Charities  By Adam Liptak  939 words 27 April 2021   21     The case, from California, could affect the regulation of ''dark money'' in political contests.  WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court on Monday seemed skeptical of California's demand that charities soliciting contributions in the state report the identities of their major donors.  A majority of the justices appeared to agree that at least the two groups challenging the requirement -- Americans for Prosperity, a foundation affiliated with the Koch family, and the Thomas More Law Center, a conservative Christian public-interest law firm -- should prevail in the case.  It was less clear whether the court would strike down the requirement entirely for all charities as a violation of the First Amendment's protection of the freedom of association. And the justices gave few hints about whether their ruling, expected by June, would alter the constitutional calculus in the related area of disclosure requirements for campaign spending.  Justice Stephen G. Breyer repeated concerns expressed in supporting briefs that the case could have broad implications. ''This case is really a stalking horse for campaign finance disclosure laws,'' he said.  In the context of elections, the Supreme Court has supported laws requiring public disclosure. In the Citizens United campaign finance decision in 2010, the court upheld the disclosure requirements before it by an 8-to-1 vote. In a second 8-to-1 decision that year, Doe v. Reed, the court ruled that people who sign petitions to put referendums on state ballots do not have a general right under the First Amendment to keep their names secret.  If the approach of the groups challenging California's requirement for charities were adopted, Justice Sonia Sotomayor said, ''I don't see how the public disclosure at issue in Doe would have survived.''  Derek L. Shaffer, a lawyer for the challengers in Monday's case, said that the electoral context was different and that charities needed protection given the nation's volatile political climate. He added that California's reporting requirement subjected donors to the real potential of harassment, particularly in light of the state's history of failing to keep the donor lists secret.  ''Think about medical organizations that may take views about masking, about vaccinations,'' he said.  Contributing to a charity for Asian-Americans, he said, might have seemed uncontroversial not long ago. ''But today, in 2021, sad to say,'' he said, ''it could be a life-or-death issue that their identities have been disclosed.''  Justice Clarence Thomas appeared to agree that donors may be endangered by disclosures of their identities. ''In this era,'' he said, ''there seems to be quite a bit of loose accusations about organizations -- for example, an organization that had certain views might be accused of being a white supremacist organization or racist or homophobic.''  The challengers received support from hundreds of groups across the ideological spectrum, including the Chamber of Commerce, the Cato Institute, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.  Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh read from a supporting brief filed by the last two groups: ''A critical corollary of the freedom to associate is the right to maintain the confidentiality of one's associations, absent a strong governmental interest in disclosure.''  The case, Americans for Prosperity v. Bonta, No. 19-251, concerned a requirement that charities file with California a copy of an Internal Revenue Service form that identifies major donors. Federal law requires the I.R.S. to keep the form confidential.  California also promised to keep the forms secret, but it has not always done so. According to court papers, it had inadvertently displayed over 1,800 forms on its website. The state has said that it has imposed new security measures.  Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. said there was little reason to trust the state. ''The brief filed by the A.C.L.U. and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund says that we should regard your system as a system of de facto public disclosure because there have been such massive confidentiality breaches in California,'' he told Aimee A. Feinberg, a lawyer for California.  She responded that a judge had said the state's efforts ''to rectify past lapses and to prevent them in the future were commendable.''  Mr. Shaffer said California had other ways to investigate potential fraud, including by auditing individual charities.  Justice Elena Kagan said not all charities objected to making their donors' names public, suggesting that a blanket rule was not needed. ''Most charities disclose their donors,'' she said. ''In fact, it's part of their strategy, that the more disclosure there is, the more fund-raising and association there is.''  Mr. Shaffer said that anything less than a ruling doing away with the requirement entirely for all charities ''will be a Pyrrhic victory.'' Requiring thousands of charities to litigate whether their donors could be subject to harassment would be, he said, a burden at odds with First Amendment freedoms.  Elizabeth B. Prelogar, the acting United States solicitor general, proposed a middle ground that did not seem to interest the justices. She urged the Supreme Court to return the case to the federal appeals court in California for a fresh look at whether the two groups challenging the requirement had provided sufficient evidence that their own First Amendment rights had been violated.  The Supreme Court will rule on whether donor disclosures required by California would be in violation of the First Amendment's protection of the freedom of association. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Stefani Reynolds for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00041 "
24		"   MICHELLE GOLDBERG  Rubio's 'Woke Capital' Tantrum  By Michelle Goldberg  965 words 27 April 2021   23     Senator Marco Rubio is extremely mad at corporations for ''bending a knee to woke progressive craziness,'' and he's going to do, well, something about it.  On Sunday, in a fulminating New York Post opinion article, Rubio wrote that ''corporate America eagerly dumps woke, toxic nonsense into our culture, and it's only gotten more destructive with time. These campaigns will be met with the same strength that any other polluter should expect.''  This analogy is slightly confusing, because usually corporate polluters should expect no pushback whatsoever from Republicans. But Rubio wants us to assume that his party thinks dumping toxic waste is bad. Big business, in Rubio's telling, used to be patriotic, but now these companies offshore jobs -- a trend that well predates Rubio's sudden anti-corporate anger -- and protest restrictions on voting rights, which Rubio describes as parroting ''woke talking points.'' That means Republicans should no longer offer corporations reflexive deference.  ''Lawmakers who have been asleep at the wheel for too long, especially within my own party, need to wake up,'' wrote Rubio.  And then what? Rubio doesn't say.  If Republicans actually wanted to scare corporations into quiescence on social issues, they have a bunch of policy options. They could, for example, support President Biden's plan to increase the corporate tax rate to 28 percent, from 21 percent, to help fund infrastructure. (It was 35 percent before Donald Trump's tax cuts.) But Rubio's not going to do that: He described Biden's corporate tax proposal as part of ''a radical agenda full of left-wing priorities.'' When Senate Republicans unveiled their counterproposal on infrastructure, it called for ''protecting against any corporate or international tax increases.''  The ''international'' part is telling. If Republicans wanted to stick it to the globalizers, they could back a proposal from the Democratic senators Mark Warner, Ron Wyden and Sherrod Brown that would make American companies pay higher taxes on profits earned overseas, prevent them from shielding their money in foreign tax havens, and repeal a tax exemption for building overseas factories. So far, Wyden tells me, no Republican has shown any interest in working with them.  ''The only unmovable policy priority Republicans have today is no taxes for megacorporations,'' he said.  In his essay, Rubio pretends that Republicans have traditionally opposed unions because companies demonstrated that they had society's best interests at heart. ''Employer-friendly labor laws make sense in a world where corporate C.E.O.s feel an obligation to their fellow countrymen and workers,'' he wrote. ''But the logic of resisting labor representation on behalf of corporate management falls apart if an American worker is no different to the corporation than any other input.''  If that logic has fallen apart, you might expect Rubio to back the Protecting the Right to Organize Act, a pro-labor bill in Congress. It would impose penalties on companies that retaliate against workers trying to organize a union, weaken laws that stop unions from collecting mandatory dues, and force companies to classify some contractors as employees. Rubio, however, opposes the PRO Act, writing last month that it would compel ''adversarial relations between labor and management.''  Last month, Rubio did support the union drive by some Amazon workers in Bessemer, Ala., framing it explicitly as payback for Amazon's cultural liberalism. ''If Amazon thinks that conservatives will automatically rally to do its bidding after proving itself to be such enthusiastic culture warriors, it is sorely mistaken,'' he wrote in a USA Today essay.  But the union drive, which Amazon opposed ferociously, failed, and Rubio isn't willing to back the kind of legislation that would make unionization easier. Too often, he wrote in USA Today, ''the right to form a union has been, in practice, a requirement that business owners allow left-wing social organizers to take over their workplaces.'' The most Rubio is willing to do is to make a temporary rhetorical alliance with workers driven by spite.  This is what most Republican populism looks like. (A possible exception is the shameful insurrectionist Josh Hawley, who has a genuine trustbusting plan.) Rubio is following a model pioneered by Trump: Rail against big corporations, occasionally bully those that defy you, but ultimately put their profits and influence first.  On issues of race and sex, the disjunction between the values of the Republican Party and those of big corporations is a function of our countermajoritarian politics.  Because of gerrymandering and the small-state bias in the Senate, Republicans can afford to antagonize young people, people in cities and most people of color. Consumer businesses cannot. The Republican Party doesn't have to care what the majority of Americans think. Public-facing corporations largely do. This creates a tension between Republicans' foundational economic interests and ideology and their cultural grievances.  Republicans no doubt find this incredibly frustrating, but not frustrating enough to ally even momentarily with Democrats. After all, Republicans are angry at corporations in the first place because they think corporations should be on their side in political fights. Democrats would love to have Republican support for reining in corporate power, even if Republicans were motivated by revenge.  But Republican threats are empty. No matter how much they hate what they call ''woke capital,'' they know they can't own the libs by teaming up with them.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Stefani Reynolds/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003a "
25		"   LETTER  The Effects of Grief  102 words 27 April 2021   22     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  Re ''The Biology of Grief'' (Well, nytimes.com, April 22):  Now I understand why perhaps, for almost a year after my husband's death, I was intermittently ill, more so than ever before in my life. I even had a deep vein thrombosis, which I never had before.  But one thing above all that I have noticed (after losing my parents, sister and husband): There is no true acceptance of their deaths, only acknowledgment.  Anne Skalitza  Spring Lake, N.J.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Isabel Seliger FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003f "
26		"    Virus Lockdowns Cut Pollution, Slowing Snowmelt in South Asia  By Henry Fountain  696 words 27 April 2021   12     Last year's lockdowns reduced emissions of soot and other pollutants that accelerate melting, which could make water supplies last longer throughout the coming year.  Cleaner skies over South Asia that resulted from pandemic lockdowns last year likely affected the timing of snowmelt in the Indus River basin of Pakistan and India, researchers reported on Monday.  The lockdowns cut emissions of soot and other pollutants, as people drove less and the generation of electricity, largely from coal, was reduced. That meant less soot was deposited on snow, where it absorbs sunlight, emits heat and causes faster melting.  The cleaner snow in 2020 reflected more sunlight and did not melt as fast, the researchers said. In all, that delayed runoff into the Indus River of more than than one and a half cubic miles of melt water, they calculated, similar to the volume of some of the largest reservoirs in the United States.  More than 300 million people depend on the Indus for water, much of which starts as snow in the high peaks of the Karakoram and other mountain ranges.  Timing of melt water runoff in the spring and summer can be crucial for managing water supplies over time. In many parts of the world, climate change has affected this timing, with warmer temperatures and a shift to more rain and less snow causing more snow to melt sooner. Slower runoff can thus be beneficial, helping managers of reservoirs store more water and maintain a steady flow over the year.  Ned Bair, a snow hydrologist at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the lead researcher, said that while they could not prove conclusively that the pandemic was the reason for the timing delay, ''it seems unlikely that anything else would have led to that.''  India imposed a nationwide lockdown in late March last year that continued through early May. Several studies showed rapid improvements in air quality in that period, particularly in and around Delhi, which is notorious for having some of the most unhealthy air in the world.  Anecdotal reports also suggested that the air over much of the subcontinent was cleaner. In Kathmandu, Nepal, for example, residents reported being able to see Mount Everest, 100 miles distant, for the first time in decades.  By analyzing satellite remote-sensing images, the researchers found that concentrations of soot and other particles on snow and ice in the Indus basin decreased by 30 percent in 2020 compared with the 20-year average.  A paper describing the findings was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.  Mark Flanner, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Michigan who was not involved in the study, said the results made sense. ''We know that the air was extremely clean this year,'' he said. ''The shoe fits the foot.''  Dr. Bair said the work showed how changes in behavior, for whatever reason, can affect water supplies. Worldwide, about two billion people rely on snow and ice melt for their water. More broadly, Dr. Flanner said, the study is ''further evidence that cleaning up the environment can have a wide variety of positive benefits that we might not immediately be aware of.''  The study adds to a growing body of work on what might be called the side effects of the pandemic. Among other findings, researchers have documented an overall reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, a shift in timing of energy use in locked-down households, and even an increase in eye injuries among children because of the widespread use of hand sanitizer.  Air quality readings ''are back to being terrible'' in Delhi, Dr. Bair said. With the recent severe surge in Covid cases in India, Delhi and some other cities are back in lockdown, at least for a few weeks. But when the new stay-home orders are eventually lifted, any effect of the pandemic on Indus melt water will most likely only be temporary.  A suspension bridge over the Indus River in Skardu, in Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan, in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Aamir Qureshi/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003v "
27		"    U.S. Population Growth 2nd Slowest on Record; Political Map Will Shift  By Sabrina Tavernise and Robert Gebeloff  1,692 words 27 April 2021   1     With immigration leveling off and a declining birthrate, the United States may be entering an era of substantially lower population growth, demographers said.  Over the past decade, the United States population grew at the second slowest rate since the government started counting in 1790, the Census Bureau reported on Monday, a remarkable slackening that was driven by a slowdown in immigration and a declining birthrate.  The bureau also reported changes to the nation's political map: The long-running trend of the South and the West gaining population -- and the congressional representation that comes with it -- at the expense of the Northeast and the Midwest continued, with Texas gaining two seats and Florida one, and New York and Ohio each losing one. California, long a leader in population growth, lost a seat for the first time in history.  The data will be used to reapportion seats in Congress and, in turn, the Electoral College, based on new state population counts. The count is critical for billions of dollars in federal funding as well as state and local planning around everything from schools to housing to hospitals.  The numbers are the product of the most embattled census process in decades. The Trump administration tried -- and failed -- to have a citizenship question added to the census form and to have unauthorized immigrants removed from the count.  The Census Bureau also faced a daunting task of conducting the census during a pandemic. When the Trump administration pushed it last summer to stop the count sooner than planned, a long court fight ensued.  At a news conference on Monday, Gina Raimondo, the secretary of commerce, declared the count to be ''complete and accurate,'' but questions and potential challenges to the data will most likely surface when the Census Bureau releases the detailed demographic files for each state. Those files, which are due out by Sept. 30, are the basis for redrawing electoral districts, a messy political process that is fought in statehouses.  The population shift to the Sun Belt has been happening for years, but its political meaning is changing. In decades past, Sun Belt gains often translated to automatic pluses for Republicans in the Electoral College. Now the calculus is more complicated.  While Donald J. Trump won the four fastest-growing states -- Utah, Idaho, Texas and North Dakota -- President Biden won four of the next five on the list: Nevada, Colorado, Washington and Arizona.  Regardless of which party ultimately benefits, the findings appear to solidify a gathering pattern in American life: The South and the West are increasingly the centers of population and power, surging ahead of the Northeast and the Midwest, whose numbers have been stagnating since a high in the first part of the 20th century.  Booming economies in states like Texas, Nevada, Arizona and North Carolina have drawn Americans away from struggling small communities in high-cost, cold-weather states. In New York, 48 of 62 counties are estimated to be losing population. In Illinois, a state that also lost a congressional seat, 93 of 102 counties are believed to be shrinking. In 1970, the West and the South combined for just under half the U.S. population -- now they make up 62 percent.  That is shifting political power. In all, six states gained congressional seats: Colorado, Florida, Montana, North Carolina, Oregon and Texas, which gained two. Seven lost a seat: California, Illinois, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.  Some states were incredibly close: New York was just 89 people short of keeping its seat, an expert at the Census Bureau said. And there were other surprises: Arizona, which demographers expected to gain a seat, did not. And though New York lost a seat, its population grew by more than 4 percent despite earlier census estimates that predicted the state would stay mostly flat.  The new decennial census counted 331,449,281 Americans as of April 1, 2020, said Dr. Ron Jarmin, the acting director of the Census Bureau. The total was up by 7.4 percent over the previous decade, slightly more than in the 1930s, when the population grew by just 7.3 percent. In that period, the birthrate rose once the economy started to climb out of the Great Depression. But this time it has continued to decline, after dropping in the wake of the Great Recession in 2008.  The lower birthrate, combined with the decline in inflows of immigrants and shifting age demographics -- there are now more Americans 80 and older than 2 or younger -- means the United States may be entering an era of substantially lower population growth, demographers said. This would put the United States in line with the countries of Europe and East Asia that face serious long-term challenges with rapidly aging populations.  ''This is a big deal,'' said Ronald Lee, a demographer who founded the Center on the Economics and Demography of Aging at the University of California, Berkeley, noting that the United States had long outpaced other developed countries in population. ''If it stays lower like this, it means the end of American exceptionalism in this regard.''  The once-in-a-decade process of counting all Americans redistributes political power based on where in the country people have moved. States that lose seats are not necessarily losing population, but are growing more slowly than the nation as a whole.  That was the case for California. For most of the 20th century, the Golden State was consistently among the fastest growing in the nation. Birthrates were rising and immigrants were moving in, as were people from other states. But over the past 30 years, its growth has slowed, in large part because of an exodus of residents to states with lower costs and booming economies like Texas and Nevada. Then, over the past decade, a falling birthrate and sharp slowdown in immigration caused the state to slip behind the nation.  According to estimates released in 2020, California had 10 percent fewer births in the 2010s than in the 2000s and took in 44 percent fewer immigrants.  Idaho was one of the fastest growers and much of its growth was fueled by transplants from California, previous data show.  When Rachel Abroms and her husband, a psychologist with the Defense Department, began looking at houses a few years ago in Coronado, on a peninsula in the San Diego Bay, even a starter home of about 1,500 square feet cost around a million dollars. So when her husband was offered a position in Boise, Idaho, they decided to move. They eventually bought a house that was twice as big for half the price.  ''It's more space,'' said Ms. Abroms of the house they bought in 2019. As for Boise, ''it's small and it's manageable, and it's pleasant.''  Another defining feature of the decade was the fall in immigration. The rates of new immigrants had been rising for years, since a modern low in the 1970s. But they mostly leveled off after the Great Recession in 2008, and went into decline during the coronavirus pandemic, said Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Research Center.  Mr. Passel said the drivers were a worsening economy in the United States and tougher enforcement on the border with Mexico, especially after 2010. Also important, he said, were Mexico's improving economy and its own lower birthrate.  ''The change in the Mexican flows is really what caused immigration to level off,'' Mr. Passel said, noting that Mexico had been the biggest source of immigration to the United States for years. He has calculated that, throughout the decade, there were more unauthorized Mexican immigrants leaving the United States than arriving.  The tapering of immigration over all has added to population woes in some states. Over the last decade, three had outright population declines: West Virginia, Mississippi and Illinois.  Illinois came close to breaking even, but still lost. Compared with the century's first decade, Illinois had 15 percent fewer births and lost nearly 40 percent more residents to other states. Between 1990 and 2010, the state's foreign-born population doubled to 1.8 million, but there was little growth after that. The state lost a congressional seat in the previous decennial census as well.  Population loss in Illinois has been felt most acutely in rural counties, particularly in the southern part of the state. Towns that were once thriving from manufacturing and the coal industry have seen residents gradually move away in search of jobs, and remaining residents say the quality of life has suffered as restaurants and other businesses have closed.  The Chicago area has been mostly flat in population in recent years, though an exodus of Black families from the city and a decline in immigration has caused alarm. The Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, a regional planning group, said in a recent report that Illinois residents leave most frequently for Indiana, Florida, Texas, California and Wisconsin.  The final driver of the country's extraordinarily sluggish growth over the past decade is a stubbornly persistent decline in the birthrate that has surprised demographers and prompted a debate over whether the delay in childbearing is a permanent new fixture in the lives of American women.  Aging populations can mean higher burdens for elder care, and slower labor force growth, with broad implications for the economy and the social safety net. But population slowdowns can also mean an improved outlook for the climate, said Professor Lee, who is also an economist. And fertility declines also reflect women's rising roles as professionals and labor force participants.  It is far from clear, Professor Lee said, where the birthrate decline that has taken hold in many rich countries is leading.  ''It's uncharted waters,'' he said. ''The consequences of low fertility are still unfolding.''  Shawn Hubler and Julie Bosman contributed reporting.  Shawn Hubler and Julie Bosman contributed reporting.  In New York, 48 of 62 counties are estimated to be losing population. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Kirsten Luce for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003t "
28		"    On Your Mark. Get Set. And Wave to the Pandas.  By Sarah Bahr  553 words 27 April 2021   3     After being closed to the public since November, eight D.C.-area institutions will again welcome visitors next month.  If you live in D.C., you're this close to the return of in-person panda peeping at the National Zoo.  The weather is getting warmer. More people are being vaccinated. And now, in the latest sign of cultural life returning to the country, the Smithsonian announced Friday that it will reopen eight of its Washington-area institutions, including the National Zoo, next month.  They won't all throw their doors open at once, though. The National Air and Space Museum's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Va., will kick things off Wednesday, May 5. It will be followed by the National Portrait Gallery, the National Museum of African American History and Culture and the Smithsonian American Art Museum and its Renwick Gallery on Friday, May 14. The final wave will include the National Museum of American History, the National Museum of the American Indian and the National Zoo on Friday, May 21.  Visitors will need to reserve free timed entry passes online for each location, which will be available beginning a week before an institution's scheduled reopening. A Smithsonian spokeswoman said capacity will vary, but will start around 25 percent, and then increase when the Smithsonian believes it can safely accommodate more visitors.  Additional precautions will also be in place: The museums and zoo will require facial coverings for everyone ages 2 and older, some sites will reduce their hours and museum cafes will remain closed.  All other Smithsonian museums remain temporarily closed. The National Museum of Natural History and the National Air and Space Museum will reopen this summer, a spokeswoman said.  Exciting things are in store at several of the soon-to-open institutions: At the Udvar-Hazy Center, Alan Shepard's Mercury capsule, Freedom 7, will go on display for the first time there to mark the 60th anniversary of the first American to fly in space. And, at the National Zoo, visitors can meet the newest panda cub, Xiao Qi Ji, for the first time.  The Smithsonian had reopened the same eight institutions in phases between July and October of last year, only to close them again in November when coronavirus cases increased across the country. Apart from those eight, all Smithsonian museums have been closed since March 2020 because of the pandemic.  The Smithsonian's New York City museums, the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum and the National Museum of the American Indian George Gustav Heye Center, have been closed to the public since March 14 of last year.  But it may not be long before the New York institutions return: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Monday that the state's museums and zoos could increase to 50 percent capacity beginning April 26. They had been allowed to open at 25 percent capacity since August.  Visitors will soon be able to meet Xiao Qi Ji, a panda cub, at the National Zoo in Washington. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SMITHSONIAN'S NATIONAL ZOO, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); The National Museum of African American History and Culture will reopen next month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LEXEY SWALL FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00036 "
29		"    Christa Ludwig, Masterly Mezzo-Soprano of Velvety Hues, Is Dead at 93  By Daniel J. Wakin  1,542 words 27 April 2021   10     She was a beloved interpreter of Strauss, Mozart and Wagner roles, but equally admired for her rendition of art songs.  Christa Ludwig, who poured a lustrous voice into dramatically taut performances of opera roles -- especially those of Mozart, Strauss and Wagner -- and intimately rendered art songs as one of the premier mezzo-sopranos of the second half of the 20th century, died on Saturday at her home in Klosterneuburg, Austria. She was 93.  Her death was confirmed by her son, Wolfgang Berry.  Ms. Ludwig commanded a broad range of the great mezzo-soprano parts, including Dorabella in Mozart's ''Così Fan Tutte,'' Cherubino in his ''Le Nozze di Figaro,'' Octavian in Strauss's ''Der Rosenkavalier,'' Bizet's Carmen and numerous Wagner roles. Often, critics were reduced to calling her the greatest mezzo-soprano of her time.  But like many mezzos, Ms. Ludwig strove to lay claim to higher-voiced -- and higher-profile -- soprano roles. So she took on, most successfully in that category, the character the Marschallin in ''Der Rosenkavalier,'' the Dyer's Wife in ''Die Frau Ohne Schatten'' and Leonore in Beethoven's ''Fidelio,'' among others.  She was an equal master of the intimate song, especially the works of Brahms, Mahler and Schubert. Her artistry put her in the pantheon of postwar lieder singers that included Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Elly Ameling and Elisabeth Schwarzkopf.  Ms. Ludwig made her Metropolitan Opera debut in 1959 as Cherubino (a trouser role, a type that she said was not her favorite), took on Octavian and Amneris in Verdi's ''Aida'' at the house that year as well, and sang regularly at the Met until the end of her career.  She was associated for decades with the Vienna State Opera and the Salzburg Festival, and worked especially closely with the conductors Karl Böhm, Leonard Bernstein and Herbert von Karajan.  Ms. Ludwig rose from straitened origins in a shattered wartime Germany to the height of the singing world, aided by a sense of discipline instilled by her strong-willed mother -- her only real teacher and a constant presence throughout her career.  She displayed traits of the pampered diva, with a preference for elegant gowns and opulent hotel suites (partly inspired by the hardships of her youth), fanatical attention to any hint of illness and the state of her vocal cords, and reverential fans who followed her from house to house. On performance days, to protect her voice, she would communicate with whistles or by writing on a pad.  But onstage, Ms. Ludwig brought a striking combination of acting ability, charisma and vocal beauty. Her voice had range and power, a security through all the registers and a broad array of colors.  ''Her unmistakable, deep-purple timbre envelops the listener in a velvet cloak,'' Roger Pines wrote in Opera News in 2018, reviewing her collected recordings. ''She excelled equally in intimate, legato-oriented lieder and the largest-scale operatic repertoire, where her sound expanded with glorious brilliance.''  Critics often took note of her wit and comic deftness and a personality that could fill a hall even when she sang softly.  ''Her presence on the Met stage was a synthesis of the dramatic arts all by itself -- her voice, her wonderfully natural diction and her shadings of facial expression and gesture all conspiring to express with great emotional breadth the singular message of this singular music,'' The new_york_times critic Bernard Holland wrote of a ''Winterreise'' performance in 1983. Ms. Ludwig sang that searing Schubert song cycle some 72 times, even though it was composed for a male voice.  Christa Ludwig was born on March 16, 1928, in Berlin. Her parents lived in Aachen, in western Germany, but her mother, Eugenie Besalla-Ludwig, wanted the child to be born in her family home in the capital.  In Aachen, Christa's Viennese father, Anton Ludwig, a former tenor who had sung with Enrico Caruso at the old Met, was the opera house stage director and manager; her mother sang in the company and performed several roles under an up-and-coming conductor named Herbert von Karajan. Christa saw those performances and many others. ''I practically lived in the theater,'' she said in her 1993 memoir, later published in English under the title ''In My Own Words.''  Her mother gave her singing lessons as a girl and remained her lifelong coach, going to her rehearsals and performances and living most of her life with Ms. Ludwig. ''I really owe everything to her,'' she said. But she also described her mother as an inflexible and sometimes suffocating presence who dominated her life before she felt able to cut ties only at age 60.  During the war, a half brother was killed on the Eastern front. Food was rationed, and Christa was sent to work on a farm. The family's home and belongings in Giessen, where Mr. Ludwig had become director of the municipal theater, were destroyed in an Allied bombing raid, leaving them homeless. With the arrival of American troops, Ms. Ludwig recounted in her memoir, she and her parents were assigned an abandoned apartment with a piano that had been used as a toilet.  Christa's mother gave voice lessons. ''Studying singing was a wonderful way to forget the wretched way we lived, the ruins, the still-smoldering coal cellars, and the stink of ashes,'' Ms. Ludwig wrote.  The young singer soon found work singing popular tunes at the American officers club, wearing a dress she had made from a Nazi flag. She was paid in cigarettes and stole whatever food she could. Once her father, who had been a member of the Nazi party, was denazified, he was given back his job and organized variety shows around town that featured his daughter.  Ms. Ludwig received her first major contract in 1946, at the Frankfurt Opera, and made her stage debut as Prince Orlofsky in ''Die Fledermaus.'' Her mother, recently divorced from her father, moved in with her in the city in an unheated room, and they began daily lessons.  Along with her opera work, she sang many concerts of contemporary music amid a wave of creative freedom unleashed by the fall of the Reich. ''I was cheap,'' she told The Guardian in 2004. ''I learned things easily, and I had a good voice.'' It was a shrewd move: Critics got to know her before she became famous.  Stints in the opera houses of Darmstadt and Hanover followed, until she was summoned to audition for Mr. Böhm, the director of the Vienna State Opera. He took her on in 1955, and she became a mainstay.  Engagements at the world's major opera houses followed.  She met the bass-baritone Walter Berry at the Vienna opera in 1957 when they were cast in ''Le Nozze di Figaro.'' They married three months later and had a son, Wolfgang, who survives her, along with a grandson and a stepson, Philippe Deiber.  The couple frequently appeared together in operas and joint recitals. In interviews, Ms. Ludwig said they felt occasional rivalry and were at odds in preparing for performances (she needed quiet, he less so; he liked small hotel rooms, and she liked large suites).  The couple divorced in 1970, though they continued to perform together. (Mr. Berry died in 2000 at 71.)  Soon after her divorce, Ms. Ludwig met the actor and stage director Paul-Emile Deiber while he was preparing a production of Massenet's ''Werther'' at the Met, and they married in 1972. He died in 2011 at 86.  Ms. Ludwig came of age at the dawn of the postwar golden era of recordings, and her LP legacy is vast, from a 1961 ''Norma'' with Maria Callas to a 1962 ''St. Matthew Passion'' conducted by Otto Klemperer, to two complete and classic Wagner ''Ring'' cycles. She appears on five ''Rosenkavalier'' recordings, including a beloved rendition with Ms. Schwarzkopf, conducted by Mr. von Karajan.  In the realm of song, critics took note of her sensitivity, smooth lines, intimacy, control and mastery of the text. ''She is perhaps the reigning feminine expert at making us feel good about lonely teardrops and thwarted bliss,'' The Times critic Donal Henahan wrote in 1979.  Despite the care that she took with her voice, Ms. Ludwig suffered damage to her vocal cords in the early 1970s that forced her to cancel numerous performances, and even parts of whole seasons. She recovered but cut back on opera appearances. She gave a series of farewell performances in the 1993-1994 season before retiring.  A few years after her vocal crisis, Ms. Ludwig made clear the pragmatic view she had about a singer's voice.  ''It's like a raw egg,'' she once said. ''Once it's kaputt, it's kaputt.''  Christa Ludwig, clockwise from left, in a 1967 performance of ''Wozzeck'' at the Vienna State Opera; as Fidelio (Leonore) in the Beethoven opera ''Fidelio'' in 1968; and with Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, at left, in 1962. Critics often noted her wit and comic deftness, and a personality that could fill a hall even when she sang softly. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GERHARD RAUCHWETTER/PICTURE ALLIANCE, VIA GETTY IMAGES; ERICH AUERBACH/HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00038 "
30		"    In Praise of Fauci and Other Public Servants  347 words 27 April 2021   22     ''Dr. Fauci has been the one constant, calm, knowledgeable messenger of scientific facts during our long national nightmare,'' a reader writes.  To the Editor:  Re ''We Owe Fauci Gratitude, Not Grief,'' by Frank Bruni (column, April 25):  Dr. Anthony Fauci is my hero in this Covid pandemic. He is the bobblehead that I proudly display on my bookshelf. I agree completely with Mr. Bruni in his assessment of the depth and commitment of this truly patriotic public servant.  Dr. Fauci has been the one constant, calm, knowledgeable messenger of scientific facts during our long national nightmare. We Americans have been able to rely on him to tell us the truth and keep us safe regardless of politics and self-serving politicians.  President Biden should award Dr. Fauci the Presidential Medal of Freedom to acknowledge all that he has done for his fellow citizens.  Caren Kalman  Woodland Park, N.J.  To the Editor:  Frank Bruni's call for gratitude is welcome, but the implication that Dr. Anthony Fauci's dedication to public service is unusual is not. While public servants are often denigrated by politicians, business leaders and the press, the federal government is nonetheless replete with dedicated ones.  Living and working in the D.C. metro area, I have many friends, neighbors and colleagues in public service -- people who are not famous, not rich, but expert in what they do and committed to doing it well. Public servants provide Americans with all kinds of things -- from safe food, to regular Social Security checks, to awe-inspiring pictures from a helicopter over Mars, just to name a few.  Dr. Fauci spent most of his long years of public service unknown to the public, but still making important contributions to public health. Dr. Fauci's fame makes him unusual, but his dedication to public service does not. We should be grateful that we have so many like him.  Maureen Conway  Takoma Park, Md.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Ben Wiseman; photograph via Wikimedia Commons FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003e "
31		"   THE CHARTS  'Slime Language 2' Tops the Billboard 200  By Joe Coscarelli  360 words 27 April 2021   3     The compilation featuring the Atlanta rapper and various artists from his Young Stoner Life label bested Taylor Swift for the top spot on Billboard's album chart.  Mixtape, playlist or compilation album -- what's the difference?  These days, on streaming services, not much. But whatever you call it, ''Slime Language 2,'' the new project from the Atlanta rapper Young Thug's Young Stoner Life label, is No. 1 on the album chart.  ''Slime Language 2'' topped the latest edition of the Billboard 200 with the equivalent of 113,000 sales in the United States, according to MRC Data, Billboard's tracking arm. That total was largely dependent on streams -- 143 million of them -- while sales of the full album topped out at 6,000 copies.  Credited to Young Thug and various artists -- many from under Thug's YSL umbrella -- ''Slime Language 2'' features 23 songs from a mix-and-match collection of Atlanta rappers like Lil Baby, Gunna, Lil Keed, Lil Duke and Unfoonk, plus less local guests like Drake, Big Sean and Lil Uzi Vert. (A week after the album's release, a deluxe version of the album added eight more tracks for a total of 31.)  First-week streams for ''Slime Language 2'' -- the sequel to a compilation released in 2018 -- matched Taylor Swift's total the week before, for her rerecorded version of ''Fearless,'' which also hit No. 1 with the year's biggest numbers to date. This week, ''Fearless (Taylor's Version)'' fell to No. 2 with 57,000 in equivalent sales, down 80 percent.  The rest of the Top 5 includes the semi-sidelined country singer Morgan Wallen's ''Dangerous: The Double Album'' at No. 3; ''Justice'' by Justin Bieber, at No. 4; and, in its chart debut, ''Heart'' by Eric Church, at No. 5.  Lil Baby, left, and Young Thug are featured on ''Slime Language 2,'' which debuted at the top of the Billboard 200 with the equivalent of 113,000 sales in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Kevin Winter/Getty Images for iHeartMedia FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003q "
32		"   LETTER  Cleaning Up Your Closet  221 words 27 April 2021   22     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  Re ''How to Get Your Closet Under Control'' (The Fix, Real Estate, April 4):  I love my clothes and tend to hold on to them for years, so I have plenty of experience trying to find the space for it all, and a system that helps me to find everything.  I've discovered these tricks:  Arrange all the clothes on the rack by color. This makes it easier to choose some old loved piece you may have forgotten about, and identify areas of need.  Store shoes in the original box. Most shoe boxes have a diagram of the shoe shown on one end of the box. I make sure it's visible. You can stack two or three boxes on those shelves, and the shoes are better protected.  Use trouser hangers, the kind with two clips, to attach to knee-high boots, and hang them up. They keep their shape better.  Finally, use those dry-cleaner bags to stuff your purses before putting them on the shelf. You guessed it: They keep their shape better.  Carol Fulghum Silver  Mountain Park, Ga.  A closet by LA Closet Design has dedicated areas for shirts, pants, shoes and hats. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Courtesy of LA Closet Design FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003d "
33		"   BRET STEPHENS  Race and the Coming Liberal Jolt  By Bret Stephens  965 words 27 April 2021   23     Americans breathed a collective sigh of relief last week after Derek Chauvin was convicted of murdering George Floyd. The crime was heinous, the verdict just, the moral neat. If you think that systemic racism is the defining fact of race relations in 21st-century America, then Chauvin's knee on Floyd's neck is its defining image.  But what about a case like that of Ma'Khia Bryant, a Black teenager who was shot and killed last week by Nicholas Reardon, a white police officer in Columbus, Ohio, at the instant that she was swinging a knife at a woman who had her back against a car?  Ben Crump, the Floyd family's lawyer, accused the Columbus police in a tweet of killing ''an unarmed 15yo Black girl.'' Valerie Jarrett, the former Obama adviser, tweeted that Bryant ''was killed because a police officer immediately decided to shoot her multiple times in order to break up a knife fight.'' Jarrett wants to ''Demand accountability'' and ''Fight for justice.''  An alternative view: Maybe there wasn't time for Officer Reardon, in an 11-second interaction, to ''de-escalate'' the situation, as he is now being faulted for failing to do. And maybe the balance of our sympathies should lie not with the would-be perpetrator of a violent assault but with the cop who saved a Black life -- namely that of Tionna Bonner, who nearly had Bryant's knife thrust into her.  That's a thought that many, perhaps most, Americans share, even if they are increasingly reluctant to say it out loud. Why reluctant? Because in this era of with-us-or-against-us politics, to have misgivings about the left's new ''anti-racist'' narrative is to run the risk of being denounced as a racist. Much better to nod along at your office's diversity, equity and inclusion sessions than suggest that enforced political indoctrination should not become a staple of American workplace culture.  And yet those doubts and misgivings go to the heart of what used to be thought of as liberalism. The result will be a liberal crackup similar to the one in the late 1960s that broke liberalism as America's dominant political force for a generation.  Morally and philosophically, liberalism believes in individual autonomy, which entails a concept of personal responsibility. The current model of anti-racism scoffs at this: It divides the world into racial identities, which in turn are governed by systems of privilege and powerlessness. Liberalism believes in process: A trial or contest is fair if standards are consistent and rules are equitable, irrespective of outcome. Anti-racism is determined to make a process achieve a desired outcome. Liberalism finds appeals to racial favoritism inherently suspect, even offensive. Anti-racism welcomes such favoritism, provided it's in the name of righting past wrongs.  Above all, liberalism believes that truth tends to be many-shaded and complex. Anti-racism is a great simplifier. Good and evil. Black and white.  This is where the anti-racism narrative will profoundly alienate liberal-minded America, even as it entrenches itself in schools, universities, corporations and other institutions of American life.  It's possible to look at Floyd's murder as the epitome of evil and not see a racist motive in every bad encounter between a white cop and a minority suspect, including the recent shootings of Adam Toledo in Chicago and Daunte Wright in Minnesota. It's possible to think that the police make too many assumptions about young Black men, sometimes with tragic consequences, and still recognize that young Black men commit violent crimes at a terribly disproportionate rate. It's possible to believe that effective policing requires that cops gain the trust of the communities they serve while recognizing that those communities are ill served when cops are afraid to do their jobs.  It is also possible to recognize that we have miles to go in ending racism while also objecting to the condescending assumptions and illiberal methods of the anti-racist creed. The idea that white skin automatically confers ''privilege'' in America is a strange concept to millions of working-class whites who have endured generations of poverty while missing out on the benefits of the past 50 years of affirmative action programs.  Similarly, the idea that past discrimination or even present-day inequality justifies explicit racial preferences in government policy is an affront to liberal values, and will become only more so as the practices become more common. In Oakland the mayor backed an initiative that was to provide $500 a month to low-income families, but not if they were white. In Vermont, the state has given people of color priority for Covid vaccines.  Ibram X. Kendi, the most important anti-racist thinker today, argues that ''the only remedy to past discrimination is present discrimination. The only remedy to present discrimination is future discrimination.'' Some liberals will go along with this. Many others will find themselves drifting rightward, much as a past generation of disaffected liberals did.  Joe Biden's resounding victory and his progressive policies are supposed to mark the real end of the Reaganite era of American politics. Don't be surprised if they're a prelude to its return, just as the last era of progressive excess ushered in its beginning.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Roberto Schmidt/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003n "
34		"    Which States Will Gain or Lose Seats in Congress  By Weiyi Cai and Reid J. Epstein  1,401 words 27 April 2021   18     The new census numbers are in, and they show an America continuing its long population shift from the Northeast and Midwest to the South and West, a trend that will shape Congress for the next decade.  The country's old center of political power -- the industrial belt stretching from New York to Illinois -- is once again losing seats in Congress while Sun Belt states such as Florida, North Carolina and Texas will gain them. California will lose a seat for the first time.  Several of the states gaining or losing seats are key swing states, and the changes to the political map will help determine which party holds majorities in the House through the 2020s, beginning with next year's midterm elections.  Most of the congressional district lines will be drawn in the upcoming months by state legislatures and local commissions that have been given redistricting authority. Republicans control the redistricting process in far more states than do Democrats, because of G.O.P. dominance in down-ballot elections.  Democrats, meanwhile, have shifted redistricting decisions in states where they have controlled the government -- such as California, Colorado and Virginia -- to independent commissions intended to create fair maps.  Congressional apportionment is determined by essentially dividing the U.S. population by 435, the number of seats in the House. The fastest-growing states will add new seats, while those that are shrinking or growing slower than the national average will lose them.  Republicans will need to flip only about five House seats in the 2022 election to seize control of the chamber.  The results released on Monday show that seven states will lose seats while six will gain. Texas will add two seats and Florida one. The fast-growing states of Montana and Oregon will each add one seat, as will Colorado and North Carolina. Montana's second seat comes after 30 years of having just a single at-large district.  At the same time, the big states of the Midwest and Northeast that historically have backed Democrats will lose congressional seats and the electoral votes that come with them. Illinois, Michigan, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania and West Virginia will each lose one district. California's loss of one seat reflects the slowing population growth of the nation's largest state.  If the 2020 election was re-run with the new Electoral College numbers, President Biden would have won 303 electoral votes, instead of the 306 he took last November. Mr. Biden won the Electoral College with plenty of votes to spare.  The census was hampered or delayed by an array of Trump administration efforts to remove undocumented immigrants from the count, a shift that mostly likely would have increased the number of Republican-held districts in the next Congress.  Who wins?  The fastest-growing states are the obvious winners. Texas has added multiple seats in each census since 1970, and Florida has added seats after each census since 1890.  No state has been gaining more people than Texas. In the last decade, Texas has effectively increased its size by the population of Connecticut -- primarily because of the swarms of Americans and new immigrants moving en masse to its booming metropolitan areas surrounding Austin, Dallas and Houston.  Having more members of Congress means more political power for the growing states of the South and West. And having more electoral votes will highlight the priorities of these states in presidential contests -- especially battlegrounds like Florida and Texas -- and draw greater attention from the candidates.  Before the 1910 census, the number of congressional seats increased as the population grew. Since 1910, the number of House seats has been capped at 435. Gaining more seats means grabbing more political power from other states.  In the last five reapportionments, Texas has added 11 congressional districts, reaching 38 beginning with the 2022 election from 27 in 1990. Just 10 other states have more members of Congress than Texas has added in that period alone.  Who loses?  That certain states are losing seats is predictable, based on historical performance. New York has now lost congressional seats for eight reapportionments in a row. Pennsylvania has lost seats after every census since 1920. Ohio and Michigan have both lost seats five times in a row. West Virginia has lost two-thirds of its congressional districts since it had six heading into the 1960 census.  But losing a seat is a new experience for California, which doubled in population between the start of World War II and the turn of the millennium.  From 1860 to 2000, California gained congressional seats after every census. It kept the same number of seats, 53, after the 2010 census. Now the Golden State will lose one, yet another indication that its political influence may have plateaued.  Never has the New York House delegation carried less weight than it will after the 2022 election. After losing one seat, New York will have 26, down from a high of 45 in the 1930s and 1940s. The state's loss was narrow -- if it had counted just 89 more people, Minnesota would have lost a seat instead of New York.  New York has not had so few members of Congress since the 1800 census, when the House had only 142 members -- less than one-third its current size.  Like New York, Pennsylvania is long past its high point of influence on Congress.  The 2020 census is the 10th in a row in which Pennsylvania has lost congressional seats.  Will more power shift to Republicans?  Republicans control the mapmaking process in key states like Florida, North Carolina and Texas, where there are new House seats to be created amid booming suburban populations. The G.O.P. is also likely to eliminate a Democratic district in Ohio, which will lose one seat.  At the same time, Democratic lawmakers in Illinois and New York are poised to eliminate Republican seats as they draw new maps.  And several key states with changes coming to their maps -- California, Colorado, Michigan and Montana -- have independent commissions tasked with determining new legislative boundaries on a nonpartisan or bipartisan basis.  ''The parties have this natural inclination to go for broke, say, 'We've got a new seat, let's grab it and take the opportunity we have,' '' said Bernard Grofman, a political science professor at the University of California, Irvine, who has served as a special master for court-ordered redistricting in multiple states. For Republicans, he said, ''picking up new seats and stopping Joe Biden is going to have a high, high priority, even though they may pay a big political price down the road.''  The 2021 redistricting process will also be the first time since 1961 that a raft of mostly Southern states will not have their maps subject to a preclearance process from the Justice Department, following the Supreme Court's 2013 decision to strike down Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. The court last month heard arguments that could undo more elements of the act that would impede the ability to sue to block new maps.  Without having to seek preclearance, Republicans in states where they control all levers of government -- Florida, Georgia and Texas, to name three -- will have far more influence on the new maps than they have had in past reapportionment cycles.  A handful of states with split control of the government -- including Minnesota, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin -- will have a battle between Republican legislators and Democratic governors. In North Carolina, Republicans who control the legislature will draw the maps, which by state law cannot be vetoed by Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat.  In Texas, it's likely its new districts will need to include at least parts of greater Houston, given the region's population boom. Republican mapmakers will be hard-pressed to draw all the new districts in their favor, given how many Democratic voters live in and around the state's largest population centers.  All districts within a state are supposed to have roughly the same population. The map below shows which districts have grown more or less than that number since redistricting after the 2010 census release.  The new Texas map presents the biggest question for partisan mapmakers: Whether to maximize their advantage heading into the 2022 midterm elections or draw fewer, more durable districts for Republicans.  Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005u "
35		"    Around The World  636 words 27 April 2021   8     THE PHILIPPINES  Variants Push Nation Over a Million Cases  The Philippines surpassed the one million mark on Monday in the total number of coronavirus cases it has reported, as the country struggles with newer, deadlier forms of the virus.  Average daily case reports in the country are not high by international standards, at about 8 per 100,000 population, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University; the U.S. rate is about 18, and much of Europe is in the 30s and 40s or worse. But the Philippines reported very few cases last year, and did not see a significant surge until recently.  In response, Manila and four other suburbs went into lockdown earlier this month. President Rodrigo Duterte is expected to speak about quarantine measures on Wednesday.  Harry Roque, spokesman for President Duterte, said new variants and not the government's pandemic policies were to blame for the surge. He noted that the Philippines was far down in the global rankings for the total number of cases.  Richard Gordon, a senator who is also the head of the Philippine Red Cross, said that the agency was urgently setting up field hospitals, quarantine hospitals and scaling up testing as the government grappled with the situation.  He added that the organization had also converted unused classrooms and buildings into quarantine facilities for people who have contracted Covid-19 but had mild symptoms.  ''Urgent extra medical care is a matter of life and death as this pandemic sets alarming new records,'' he said. ''Our volunteers are working day and night.''  TURKEY  Wary President Orders Three-Week Lockdown  President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey ordered a national lockdown for three weeks, closing nonessential businesses and sending all students home, as the nation struggles to contain the latest surge in cases of the coronavirus.  Turkey ranks fourth in the world in new daily cases per person, averaging 63 cases per 100,000 people, according to a new_york_times database. Its seven-day average for deaths ranks 11th in the world.  The lockdown starts on April 29 and will end on May 17, coinciding with Eid al-Fitr, the end of the holy month of Ramadan, Mr. Erdogan said after meeting with his cabinet. Schools and restaurants will close and travel within Turkey will require a permit, he said. Government employees will either work from home or in shifts. Essential businesses like those in the food, manufacturing and health sectors will be exempt, Mr. Erdogan said.  ''In a period where Europe is opening up, we have to pull the number of cases'' lower, Mr. Erdogan said. ''Otherwise, it would be inevitable to face a heavy cost from tourism to trade to education.''  So far, about 16 percent of its total population has received at least one dose of the vaccine from Sinovac or Pfizer-BioNTech, according to data from the Our World in Data project at the University of Oxford.  Turkey reported about 63,000 new cases on April 16, its highest daily tally since the start of the pandemic.  EUROPEAN UNION  Bloc Reopens Its Borders to American Tourists  Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said in an interview with The Times on Sunday that American tourists who have been fully vaccinated against Covid-19 would be able to visit the E.U. this summer. The announcement came more than a year after the bloc shut down nonessential travel to limit the spread of the virus.  Ms. von der Leyen did not offer a timeline for when exactly tourist travel might open up or details on how it would occur. But the fast pace of vaccination in the U.S. and the advanced talks between the U.S. and E.U. on vaccination certificates have enabled the switch in policy.  Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005t "
36		"    Efforts to Vaccinate Homebound Seniors Lag in New York City  By Sharon Otterman  1,614 words 27 April 2021   8     Efforts to vaccinate homebound seniors in New York have lagged, and the national pause on the Johnson & Johnson vaccine set them back further.  Antonia Laraki is homebound, with a leg badly swollen from lymphedema and a son with autism at home who relies on her. After applying for a citywide program in mid-March that vaccinates homebound people, she waited weeks just to hear when the city might be able to send someone to her apartment.  Finally, on Tuesday, she got the news: A team of vaccinators would be able to make it to her apartment the next day, with the Moderna shot. The city had been using Johnson & Johnson for the program, but after a national pause in administering that vaccine because of a rare blood clot disorder, some of its partners were able to pivot.  Still, the pause caused the cancellation of more than 1,000 appointments for homebound people, adding yet another hurdle to a program that has moved slowly.  ''I'm happy,'' said Mrs. Laraki, 75, on Friday, from her apartment in a Manhattan housing project. ''I feel relieved.''  While more than 2 million people are now fully vaccinated in New York City, the city's effort to vaccinate homebound seniors has lagged. Though there are an estimated 23,000 homebound seniors and other homebound adults who need shots, city teams had made 4,292 vaccination visits as of Friday.  The city did not begin its main homebound vaccine effort until March 1, in large part out of a desire to wait for the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, which planners knew would be logistically easier to use because it requires just one dose.  A committee of outside health experts on Friday recommended lifting the pause, and federal officials quickly did so. But the fear the pause generated has the potential to be a major setback to the program, which had finally ramped up and was reaching about 1,200 people per week.  ''We are in a time frame here that is frightening,'' said Gale Brewer, the Manhattan borough president, who has been leading a weekly task force meeting focused on the vaccine rollout. ''We are all trying to beat the variants, and with the home health aides going in and out, there is risk.''  The city is hopeful it will be able to soon restart the program fully and convince people the vaccine is safe.  ''As the primary provider of homebound vaccinations in the city, we remain undeterred in restarting the program to reach as many people as possible,'' said Avery Cohen, a spokeswoman for City Hall.  The hurdles facing homebound seniors reflect the broader issues that have shadowed the nation's vaccine drive in general. While nearly half of all New York City adults have already gotten at least one vaccine dose, roughly equal to the national average, the vaccine rollout has been most accessible to internet-savvy people who are mobile, and have time and energy to dedicate to getting vaccinated.  People who are frail, hesitant and not able to use the internet in English have been harder to reach. While 80 percent of people over age 65 have gotten at least one dose nationwide, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in New York City, that number drops to 61 percent. And people 85 and older have the lowest rates of vaccination among the city's seniors, with only 49 percent of New Yorkers in that age group having received at least one dose, according to city data.  The city said its vaccination rate for older residents overall was roughly on par with that of other cities, such as Los Angeles, where 70 percent of those over 65 had gotten a single dose. It pointed to the many other efforts it was using to reach seniors, from dozens of pop-up vaccine clinics in senior buildings to free transportation to vaccine sites.  Ms. Cohen noted that a total of 6,584 vaccinations had been completed through the program as of Friday, in part because on each visit, vaccinators may also give shots to others in the home who qualify. While the Johnson & Johnson pause had brought the program to a complete halt, within days, some of its providers had been able to start administering Moderna vaccines instead.  The city's main homebound vaccine effort, run by the Fire Department, is still hoping to return to using the Johnson & Johnson vaccine now that it has again been approved by federal regulators, officials said.  Each weekday morning before the pause, 30 teams of homebound vaccinators, each with a nurse, a data entry person and a driver, have been gathering at a South Brooklyn base before spreading out around the city to reach the homebound, said Rich DePrima, the fire department battalion chief coordinating the program.  George Rodriguez, 83, lives alone and is also homebound. He has not gotten vaccinated yet, but he will only agree to an injection if his beloved caseworker from the local community center is there to make him feel safe, he said. And ever since the national pause, he fears getting the Johnson & Johnson shot.  ''I only have him, he is my second half,'' he said of his caseworker, Albert Bencosme. ''I don't have nobody else. Just him and God.''  A travel nurse provider called Aya Healthcare has been supplying the nurses for the Fire Department's effort. The city has also begun contracting with other companies, including the Visiting Nurse Service of New York and Zeel, a tech-focused wellness company, in order to speed up vaccinations to thousands of people already on waiting lists. The Northwell Health and Mount Sinai hospital systems each have also made around 550 visits to people already receiving at-home care through their systems, they said.  But the city's vaccination program also has been hindered by red tape, Ms. Brewer and several community-based organizations working with older New Yorkers said.  People wishing to register for a homebound vaccine through the city must fill out an interest form. Then someone from the city is supposed to reach out to each senior to verify they are ''fully homebound,'' meaning that they cannot leave their home, even with assistance. Then, the representative can schedule a vaccination.  This multi-step process has proved difficult to navigate, and does not line up with the reality of many homebound New Yorkers, said Maria Muniz, program director at Casabe Houses for the Elderly, a subsidized senior building in East Harlem. There are about 30 homebound people in her building, she said, and she filled out a form for each of them. She then gave her office phone number for each, because her residents, many of whom do not speak English well and have health impairments, do not always answer their phones.  Vaccinators sometimes call in the evenings when her office is closed, or on the weekends, she said. They have not been leaving messages, or they want to speak to each resident individually.  ''Their response is really bad, I'm not getting anywhere,'' Ms. Muniz said.  She has started talking with a local community clinic to see if she can get them to visit her residents directly. One of her homebound residents, she said, is 99; two others are in their mid-90s.  Gregory J. Morris, the executive director of the Stanley M. Isaacs Neighborhood Center on East 93rd Street, said he has been frustrated that the city has not asked him for more help coordinating and communicating with the 1,000 homebound seniors his organization delivers meals to in East Harlem and the Upper East Side, including Mrs. Laraki and Mr. Rodriguez.  The senior center said Friday that many of their homebound clients were feeling isolated and confused.  ''We could shape the delivery process, be active in saying to people what's happening when. We can help them feel comfortable and safe when it happens,'' Mr. Morris said. ''And right now, I can't say what my role is except that I've been asked to send names into a void.''  Kathryn Haslanger, the chief executive of JASA, another organization that provides services for homebound seniors, said that of the 250 people the organization had referred for home vaccination, 60 had gotten vaccinated so far.  Ms. Cohen said that the city's initial list of homebound seniors had been compiled largely through case managers at the Department of Aging and Medicaid referrals, and that the city was now ''laser-focused'' on rescheduling those whose shots were canceled.  Instead of waiting, at least one nonprofit organization, the Bronx Rising Initiative, has decided to organize shots on its own. It has raised $500,000 from private donors to bring vaccinations to homebound residents in the Bronx, and is going door to door in housing projects and working with tenant organizations to find people, said Tomas Ramos, the organization's founder.  Working with a local clinic, VIP Community Services, the group had just started vaccinating with the Johnson & Johnson on April 12. It has since pivoted to the Moderna shot. Unlike the city, it is not requiring documentation or checking a senior's mobility level before scheduling at-home visits.  ''There are a lot of gaps when it comes to government,'' Mr. Ramos said. ''Because we are in the community, we solve the problem.''  ANTONIA LARAKI, 75, who was vaccinated at her house through a citywide program on Wednesday.; Darcia Bryden-Currie prepares a dose of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine for Stephen Elliott in his apartment on April 12. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00034 "
37		"    Admiring, and Wary, as They See Women Rise  By Claire Cain Miller and Ruth Fremson  1,520 words 27 April 2021   14     When Sarah Hamilton was in high school, Hillary Clinton was running for president, and it made a big impression. Her candidacy made Ms. Hamilton want to become a leader someday too, she said, and maybe even run for office.  Four years later, Ms. Hamilton, 21, is no longer interested in leadership. Even though it felt exciting to see Kamala Harris become vice president, she said, the sexism she thought that Ms. Harris and the other female candidates faced was too much. Ms. Hamilton, a graphic designer in San Francisco, would rather help people in a more personal way, like mentoring.  ''Before Donald Trump won, I had in my head being a woman doesn't really matter,'' she said. ''I think it's really damaging. All of those women have shown you can rise above that stuff, and you can be in those positions and succeed. But I think for a lot of little girls and people like me, they see that and think, 'If that's what it takes to achieve that position, I don't think it's worth it.'''  This generation of teenagers was raised hearing that girls could be anything they wanted -- maybe even president. Many of them say it's important for leadership to be more inclusive than in the past. But they are also cleareyed about the sexism female leaders face, as are their male peers, according to a new survey of 604 teenagers by Dynata for The new_york_times.  Seven in 10 teenage girls and boys said they thought a woman would be elected president in the next decade. But 80 percent of girls and 74 percent of boys said women face sexism when they run, and just half of teenagers thought men and women had an equal chance of being elected, found the survey. It included 327 girls, nearly half of whom were Black, Hispanic, Native American or Asian-American.  Ms. Hamilton was part of a group of young women who were first interviewed as Oregon high schoolers in 2016. (We followed up with them now that they can vote). The last four years, they said, had opened their eyes to systemic sexism and racism. For some, it moved them to activism or leadership. For others, like Ms. Hamilton, it made them search elsewhere for a way to make a difference. All said it emphasized for them the importance of diversity in government.  ''As these girls come into voting age, they are going to insist that the spaces that they enter are representative of the people,'' said Valeria Sinclair-Chapman, a political scientist at Purdue. ''That is going to be remarkable -- and it's going to create some problems for the Democratic Party, in that the party is not going to be moving fast enough for these girls.''  Like the young women from Oregon, who were from a liberal city and a conservative rural town, young people nationally lean left, research shows. Pew Research Center has found that Generation Z, including those who identify as Republican, is more open-minded than older generations about various types of diversity. In the Dynata survey, even though Biden-supporting girls were more likely to stress the importance of female leaders and the challenge of sexism, the majority of Trump-supporting girls did, too.  Recent events have reinforced the conflicting messages young women receive. They have seen record numbers of women enter Congress and the first female vice president. Some exchanged pinkie promises with Elizabeth Warren to remember that she was running because ''that's what girls do.'' But they've also seen the women who ran for the highest office lose, and a president who has belittled women and critiqued female leaders' appearance.  The survey showed that young people no longer believe many of the things that have hindered women seeking leadership before. Nine in 10 teenagers, regardless of gender, said that ambition was a good trait in both males and females.  But asked if they were interested in running for office in the future, six in 10 white boys said yes, compared with 44 percent of white girls. Among teenagers of color, 39 percent of boys and 36 percent of girls wanted to run.  One reason for the difference is that most of the leaders children learn about are white men, said Mirya Holman, a political scientist at Tulane. Also, they pick up on the idea that boys -- but not girls -- should be competitive and aggressive, and that those traits are necessary in politics.  But research has also shown the power of role models, particularly the first time someone from a group becomes a leader. The survey found that girls were most inspired to consider leadership by the many ''firsts'' of the Biden administration -- including the first women, people of color and gay people to serve in some senior roles.  ''It was really powerful to see Kamala Harris be able to be in such a high place of power, because she's an African-American woman and so am I,'' said Georgia Wolfe, 19, who is studying to become a dentist and living in her sorority at the University of Oregon. ''It widens who I think deserves a say in my life, and it just gives me hope.''  (Ms. Harris may be a role model in a more concrete way: the Converse sneakers she often wore on the campaign trail. Four in ten of the girls, and more Democrats than Republicans, said that as adults, they saw themselves wearing sneakers to work -- the most of any shoe choice. Just one in 10 planned to wear heels.)  Even for teenagers who do not plan to run, the survey showed they were attuned to the effects of diversity in government. Eighty percent of the girls said that having more women in public office was important. Just 38 percent of girls of color said the government had their interests in mind.  When she was in high school, Daryn Hickok was a Black Student Union secretary and wanted to be ''the first girl president.'' No longer. Ms. Hickok, now a 20-year-old basketball player at Weber State in Ogden, Utah, said she had shifted her focus.  ''Just seeing how underrepresented women were, especially Black women, was crazy to me,'' she said. ''It did not motivate me to want to become a senator or anything like that, but it motivated me to want to be well educated in it, and to be able to educate others.''  In the survey, three-quarters of girls who supported Mr. Trump said his presidency inspired them to consider running for office. Others turned to activism out of disillusionment with his presidency -- nearly half of girls who supported Mr. Biden also said Mr. Trump made them more interested in running.  Ana Shepherd, 18, said she had been repelled by politicians and lawyers -- until the Trump presidency. Now, she is studying political science and wants to become an immigration lawyer. A Mexican immigrant, she said the treatment of immigrants by the Trump administration catalyzed her.  ''It's almost out of spite for the past four years,'' Ms. Shepherd said. ''Out of spite, I want to be the brown Mexican politician who rose.''  Some were grappling with race in other ways. Jessica Griepenburg, 19, has spent the pandemic working as a nanny and writing a novel, on a year off from Mills College. She said her longstanding skepticism of government grew as she watched recent events, attended protests and learned new perspectives at college. ''It's a lot easier for me to get my voice heard as a white woman, and I don't think we need more of that,'' she said.  ''There are a lot more people who deserve a leadership role more than I do,'' she said, an idea other white girls echoed.  Jordan Barrett, 19, was a Trump supporter in 2016, like her family and most of her hometown, Moro, Ore. She's still there, attending college remotely, raising goats and studying animal science. She said the last four years had made her think about whose voices are heard. Her first time voting for president, she chose Mr. Biden.  ''I think my generation is a little more fearless when they stand up for things,'' she said. ''I'm hoping they're using their power and voice for good, and to represent people who don't have a voice.''  ''I'm going to be the first female president because I want to prove that I could accomplish it.''; ''It's important for women to be in leadership positions because so often women's voices aren't heard ...''; ''I'm like really scared if Donald Trump becomes president, and they're just letting it happen ...'' (A14); ''Hillary Clinton is hugely inspirational, and sets an example of what a woman in power should look like.''; ''I want to be as much of a role model as possible for young girls.''; ''I think Donald Trump has better intentions and better ways of executing how to help America ...'' (A15)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005v "
38		"    Pregnancy: Preterm Birth and Heart Failure  By Nicholas Bakalar  267 words 27 April 2021   6     Preterm babies are at increased risk for heart failure, a new study suggests, and the risk appears to persist into early middle age.  Researchers examined birth records of every singleton live birth in Sweden between 1973 and 2014 -- a total of 4,193,069 people. They tracked their health until the oldest were 43, looking for cases of heart failure.  Heart failure in people this young is, of course, rare. They found it affected only 4,158 people, or about 0.1 percent of the population.  But compared with a full-term baby, a baby born before 37 weeks' gestation had three and a half times the risk of heart failure between the ages of 1 and 17, and a 40 percent increased risk up to age 43. The shorter the gestation, the greater the risk: a baby born before 27 weeks had more than 12 times the risk of heart failure between ages 1 and 17, and almost five times the risk from 18 to 43.  The study, in JAMA Pediatrics, controlled for various child and maternal characteristics, including birth defects, but not for lifestyle factors during follow-up such as physical activity, diet, smoking and alcohol use.  ''People born preterm need to be aware of this long-term increased risk,'' said the lead author, Dr. Casey Crump, a professor of family medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York. ''They need to be followed up into adulthood -- even if they did well in childhood.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amrita Marino FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005s "
39		"    Enduring Flood of Severe Cases, a Nation Confronts a Bleak Puzzle  1,701 words 27 April 2021   8     By David Leonhardt  Good morning. Many people in India thought the country had escaped the worst of Covid-19. What happened?  'I would not have dreamt ...'  There is a new Covid-19 mystery in India, and it is far grimmer than the first one.  For most of the past year, Covid deaths across much of Asia and Africa have been strikingly low, as I described last month. And they remain low in nearly all of Africa and East Asia -- but not India, which is suffering a terrible outbreak. Hospitals are running out of oxygen to treat patients, and confirmed Covid deaths have climbed to 2,000 per day, up from fewer than 100 in February. The true death toll is even higher.  The sharp increase has surprised many people, both inside and outside India. ''India's massive Covid surge puzzles scientists,'' as Smriti Mallapaty wrote in Nature. ''I was expecting fresh waves of infection,'' Shahid Jameel, a virologist at Ashoka University, said, ''but I would not have dreamt that it would be this strong.''  The price of hubris  To make some sense of what's happening, it helps to go back to last year, when Indian doctors and officials were preparing for waves of serious Covid illnesses. But those waves never quite arrived. Instead, millions of people contracted only mild cases.  The most plausible explanations -- the amount of time people spend outdoors in India, the low levels of obesity, the population's relative youth and the possibility that previous viruses had created some natural immunity -- all seemed to suggest that India was not simply on a delayed Covid timetable. The country, like many of its neighbors, seemed to be escaping the worst of the pandemic.  Scientific research suggesting that about half of adults in major cities had already been infected was consistent with this notion. ''It led to the assumption that India had been cheaply, naturally vaccinated,'' Dr. Prabhat Jha, an epidemiologist at the University of Toronto, told me.  Government officials acted particularly confident. As Ramanan Laxminarayan, a Princeton University epidemiologist based in New Delhi, told Nature, ''There was a public narrative that India had conquered Covid-19.'' Some scientists who thought that a new Covid wave remained possible were afraid to contradict the message coming from Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government. Modi has a record of stifling dissent, and Freedom House, the democracy watchdog group, recently said India had become only a ''partly free'' country that was moving ''toward authoritarianism.''  Confident they had beaten Covid, government officials relaxed restrictions on virtually all activities, including weddings, political rallies and religious gatherings. The northern town of Haridwar held one of the world's biggest gatherings this month, with millions of people celebrating the Hindu festival Kumbh Mela.  By mid-March, though, the virus was beginning to reassert itself. A major factor appears to be that many people who previously had mild or asymptomatic cases of Covid remained vulnerable to it. (A recent academic study, done in China, suggests that mild cases confer only limited immunity.) The emergence of contagious new variants is playing a role, too. This combination -- less immunity than many people thought, new variants and a resumption of activities -- seems to have led to multiple superspreader events, Dr. Jennifer Lighter of New York University told me.  The situation is so dire that some Indian crematories are overwhelmed. Suresh Bhai, who works in one in the western state of Gujarat, told The Times that he had never seen such a never-ending assembly line of death.  What now?  The available solutions are no secret. The same two strategies have worked around the world: restricting the activities that spread the virus, and accelerating the pace of vaccinations.  Over the past two weeks, some local governments, including in Delhi and Mumbai, have announced restrictions on travel, weddings, shopping and other activities. Speeding up vaccinations will be more complicated. About 10 percent of India's population has received at least one shot, leaving more than a billion people to vaccinate fully.  To do so, India -- a major vaccine manufacturer -- has recently cut back on exporting doses. Indian officials have also criticized the Biden administration for not exporting more vaccine supplies to India, given the large U.S. supply. (The U.S. said yesterday that it would do so.)  Amid all the suffering, there is one glimmer of potential good news, Jha said. Caseloads in India's second-most populous state -- Maharashtra, home to Mumbai -- have often been a leading indicator of national trends, and cases there have leveled off over the past week. It's too early to know whether that's just a blip, but it would be a big deal if the situation in Maharashtra stabilized.  The latest: In another anti-democratic move, India's government ordered Facebook, Instagram and Twitter to take down posts critical of its handling of the pandemic.  THE LATEST NEWS  The Virus  â  Confirmed new cases in the U.S. have fallen 18 percent since April 14 and remain in the narrow range where they have held since late February.  â  Fully vaccinated Americans will be able to visit the E.U. this summer.  â  Michigan's hospitals are admitting more younger patients than at any point in the pandemic, many very ill.  â  The C.D.C. issued cautious guidelines for summer camps: Kids can be within three feet of each other outdoors but should wear masks most of the time.  â  Four months after Congress approved almost $50 billion to help Americans pay rent, little has reached tenants or landlords.  â  The U.S. immigration detention system is rife with outbreaks. A Times video investigation examined why.  â  Virus resources: U.S. Maps & Cases | Vaccinations | Outdoor Mask Guidance  The Academy Awards  â  ''Nomadland'' was the night's big winner, taking home Oscars for best picture, best actress for Frances McDormand and best director for ChloÃ© Zhao, the first woman of color to win the award.  â  Anthony Hopkins, 83, won best actor for his role in ''The Father.'' The late Chadwick Boseman had been a favorite. Here are all the winners.  â  The show didn't have jokes, musical numbers or clip montages. It felt like ''a cross between the Golden Globes and the closing-night banquet of a long, exhausting convention,'' Mike Hale writes.  â  And here are the red-carpet looks.  Other Big Stories  â  A fire in a Baghdad hospital killed at least 82 people, mostly Covid patients and their relatives.  â  Officers using deadly force rely on a 30-year-old Supreme Court decision. The movement launched by the death of George Floyd is trying to change that.  â  Criminal groups have taken over parts of Venezuela, as the country's economic crisis grows. The Times traveled through one of the regions they control.  â  Fighting erupted in the Somali capital, Mogadishu. Opponents of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed accuse him of a power grab.  â  A leaked audiotape offers a glimpse into the power struggles of Iranian leaders.  Opinions  â  ''It begins to close the open wound'': Politico's Charlie Mahtesian, whose grandfather survived the Armenian genocide, praises President Biden's decision to recognize it.  â  The Times's Gail Collins and Bret Stephens in conversation.  Morning Reads  Slander, Inc.: A Times reporter wanted to learn about rumor websites. So he wrote a post about himself, and watched it spread.  Tech Fix: Apple's new privacy tool gives users more control over their data. Here's how it works. (It could have lasting effects for apps like Facebook.)  Lives Lived: Bob Fass hosted an anarchic and influential radio show in New York for more than 50 years, with guests including Bob Dylan and Abbie Hoffman. Fass died at 87.  ARTS AND IDEAS  Why shows sound different  It's hard to imagine the teen drama ''Dawson's Creek'' without its theme song, ''I Don't Want to Wait,'' by Paula Cole. Yet -- to the dismay of many fans -- that's the only way to watch it on streaming platforms. Nearly all of the original music for the series, which began airing in the late '90s, is missing on Netflix, Hulu and other platforms.  It's an issue that plagues many shows that find a second life on streaming: They no longer have the rights to use their original soundtracks, as Calum Marsh writes in The Times.  TV shows pay for the right to use songs. Before streaming, producers often opted for short-term licenses on popular songs, to save money. But streaming has increased the number of shows that endure for years, leaving some without their music.  Newer shows aren't making the same mistake. ''We have to get rights forever,'' Robin Urdang, an Emmy-winning music supervisor, said. And some old shows are responding to the fan outcry: Cole said a new deal means that her song will soon be back as the ''Dawson's Creek'' opener. -- Sanam Yar, Morning writer  PLAY, WATCH, EAT  What to Cook  This lemon-raspberry danish is simpler than it looks.  What to Listen to  New tracks by Weezer, Jorja Smith and more.  Virtual Travel  See Sweden in bloom.  Now Time to Play  The pangram from Friday's Spelling Bee was allowance. Here is today's puzzle -- or you can play online.  Here's today's Mini Crossword, and a clue: Scratch-off ticket game (five letters).  If you're in the mood to play more, find all our games here.  ______  Thanks for spending part of your morning with The Times. See you tomorrow. -- David  P.S. Battling insomnia? Dubious about supplements? The Times's Well section wants to answer your questions about sleep. Ask them here.  You can see today's print front page here.  Today's episode of ''The Daily'' is about Russia's vaccine diplomacy. On the Book Review podcast, Patrick Radden Keefe discusses his new history of the family behind Purdue Pharma.  Claire Moses, Ian Prasad Philbrick, Tom Wright-Piersanti and Sanam Yar contributed to The Morning. You can reach the team at themorning@nytimes.com .  Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox .  Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005p "
40		"    Children: Eczema and Learning Issues  By Nicholas Bakalar  269 words 27 April 2021   6     Children with eczema may be at higher risk for learning disabilities, and the more severe the eczema, the higher the risk appears to be, researchers report.  For a study published in JAMA Dermatology, scientists used records of 2,074 children with eczema. The children had been enrolled at ages 2 to 17 in a study of a medicine used to treat eczema, and they were followed for an average of 10 years.  The researchers recorded cases of learning disabilities that were reported by parents or diagnosed by health care practitioners and rated the severity using a 28-point scale.  After controlling for other factors, including age, sex, race and seasonal allergies, they found that compared with children with clear or mostly clear skin, mild eczema was associated with a 72 percent increased relative risk of learning disability; moderate skin damage was associated with double the risk; and severe or very severe eczema was associated with more than triple the risk for a diagnosed learning disability.  The lead author, Dr. Joy Wan, an instructor in dermatology at the University of Pennsylvania, pointed out some limitations of the study. ''We don't have a very good definition of learning disability, and self-reports can be unreliable,'' she said. The study was also observational so does not prove that eczema causes learning disabilities.  Still, she said, ''If your child has eczema and you're concerned about learning, concentration, sleep or mood problems, you should bring this up with your health care provider.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amrita Marino FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005r "
41		"    Frustrated With Online Classes, Italy's Students Drop Out  By Emma Bubola  1,269 words 27 April 2021   10     Even before the coronavirus hit, Italy had among the worst dropout rates in Europe. But closed schools and online classes have pushed students out in ever higher numbers.  NAPLES -- Francesca Nardi never liked school, or thought she was particularly good at it, but with the help of teachers and classmates she had managed to stick around until 11th grade. When the pandemic hit, though, she found herself lost in online classes, unable to understand her teacher through the tablet the school gave her. She was failing, likely to get left back, and planning to drop out.  On a recent Wednesday afternoon she paused from chatting with two friends, who had already dropped out, near her house in the projects of Naples' eastern outskirts.  ''It's better if I just work,'' Ms. Nardi, 15, said. ''And not waste another year.''  Even before the pandemic, Italy had among the worst dropout rates in the European Union, and the southern city of Naples was particularly troubled by high numbers. When the coronavirus hit, Italy shuttered its schools more than just about all the other European Union member states, with especially long closures in the Naples region, pushing students out in even higher numbers.  While it is too early for reliable statistics, principals, advocates and social workers say they have seen a sharp increase in the number of students falling out of the system. The impact on an entire generation may be one of the pandemic's lasting tolls.  Italy closed its schools -- fully or in part -- for 35 weeks in the first year of the pandemic -- three times longer than France, and more than Spain or Germany.  And experts say that by doing so, the country, which has Europe's oldest population and was already lagging behind in critical educational indicators, has risked leaving behind its youth, its greatest and rarest resource for a strong post-pandemic recovery.  ''We are preparing badly for the future,'' said Chiara Saraceno, an Italian sociologist who works on education.  Italy's prime minister, Mario Draghi, allowed all Italian high school students to go back to school in person for at least half of their classes starting on Monday. Finishing the academic year in class, Mr. Draghi has said, should be a priority.  ''The whole government thinks that school is a fundamental backbone of our society,'' said Italy's health minister, Roberto Speranza. ''The first place where we will invest.''  But a good deal of damage has already been done.  Throughout much of the last year, the government argued that keeping high schools closed was necessary to prevent infection on the public transportation that students took to and from class.  Elementary schools were allowed to open more often, but the country's insistence on closures, especially of middle and high schools, experts say, risked exacerbating inequalities and the country's profound north-south divide. National and regional officials drew sharp criticism, and even the education minister who was in office then argued that schools should have opened more.  Mr. Speranza acknowledged that schools had paid ''a very high price in these months.''  Schools around the southern city of Naples have remained closed longer than the rest of the country, in part because the president of the Campania region, Vincenzo De Luca, insisted they were a potential source of infection. At one point, he mocked the notion that children in his region were ''crying to go to school.''  In Naples, the dropout rate is about 20 percent, twice the European average, and in the city's outskirts it is even higher. Teachers there have struggled to keep students interested in school, and worry that months of closed classrooms would shut students out for good.  As schools closed Francesco Saturno, 13, spent his mornings helping in his grandfather's fruit shop, sleeping in or glued to his PlayStation. He only twice logged on to his online class.  His mother, Angela Esposito, 33, who herself dropped out of high school, worried that he might leave school and follow in the footsteps of his father, who earns tips of loose change for babysitting parked cars in Naples.  ''I am scared that if he doesn't go to school he is going to get lost,'' she said. ''And getting lost in Naples is dangerous.''  In Italy, it is illegal for students below the age of 16 to drop out of school, and the local prosecutor for the minors' court, aware that social workers are swamped, asked school principals to report dropout cases directly to her.  ''I am really worried,'' said the prosecutor, Maria De Luzenberger. In the last month, about a thousand drop out cases from Naples and the nearby city of Caserta have piled up on her desk, she said. That was more than in all of 2019. ''I didn't expect such a flood.''  Colomba Punzo, the principal of Francesco's school, said dropouts had tripled in her primary and middle school during the school closures. She scrambled to find an alternative, and organized in-person workshops every morning to get Francesco and other at-risk children back into the system.  Ms. Punzo said policymakers underestimated how closing schools in neighborhoods like Ponticelli meant cutting ''the only possible lifeline'' for the children. ''When the school is open you can grab them and make them come, when the school is closed what do you do?''  In Naples' Scampia district, known across Italy as a tough place plagued for years by the Camorra mafia, teachers at the Melissa Bassi High School had made significant progress in getting local children into school through art projects, workshops and personal tutoring.  The school's principal said half of its students stopped following classes when they moved online. He said they gave cellphone SIM cards to those who could not afford Wi-Fi and offered evening lessons to teenagers forced to work as the pandemic hit their families' finances.  But the challenge was enormous. Some of the neighborhood's most neglected housing projects lack cellphone coverage, and children are often crammed with multiple family members into a few rooms. Teachers hoped most of the students would return if and when schools reopened, but they feared those who fell behind won't see the point of going back.  ''They are so discouraged,'' said Marta Compagnone, a teacher there. ''They think the bets are off.''  Hanging out with his friends on the steps of a square below the ''Sails,'' a huge triangular housing project a few blocks from Melissa Bassi High School, Giordano Francesco, 16, said he often fell asleep, grew bored and frustrated with the online classes he followed on his phone. He got into arguments with teachers because he often logged off to help his grandfather, who has Alzheimer's disease, eat or use the bathroom.  His mother, who left school at 10 and lost her job as a theater cleaner during the pandemic, asked him to finish the school year. He said he would, and then drop out afterward.  His girlfriend, Marika Iorio, 15, standing next to him, said she intended to graduate, become a psychologist and live a different life from her father, who cannot read or write. But she was struggling to follow school online and failing her classes, too.  ''I am scared I might not make it,'' she said.  Above, inactivity at the Melissa Bassi High School in Naples, Italy. Francesco Saturno, 13, center left, rarely attends online class, prompting his mother, Angela Esposito, near left, to worry. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GIOVANNI CIPRIANO FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003b "
42		"    Covid-19 Exposure Risk in the United States by County  86 words 27 April 2021   4     About 66 percent of people nationwide live in counties with a very high or extremely high risk of exposure to Covid-19, according to an analysis of coronavirus case and testing data by The new_york_times and public health experts. This map shows the current exposure risk level for each county. For information about every county and a full description of suggested activities at each risk level, go to nytimes.com/covidrisk  Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005o "
43		"    Moon Craters Bearing Names Of Women  By Katherine Kornei  1,036 words 27 April 2021   2     The moon's surface is pockmarked with craters, the relics of violent impacts over cosmic time. A few of the largest are visible to the naked eye, and a backyard telescope reveals hundreds more. But turn astronomical observatories or even a space probe on our nearest celestial neighbor, and suddenly millions appear.  Bettina Forget, an artist and researcher at Concordia University in Montreal, has been drawing lunar craters for years. Ms. Forget is an amateur astronomer, and the practice combines her interests in art and science. ''I come from a family of artists,'' she said. ''I had to fight for a chemistry set.''  Moon craters are named, according to convention, for scientists, engineers and explorers. Some that Ms. Forget draws have familiar names: Newton, Copernicus, Einstein. But many do not. Drawing craters with unfamiliar names prompted Ms. Forget to wonder: Who were these people? And how many were women?  ''Once this question embeds itself in your mind, then you've got to know,'' she said.  Ms. Forget pored over records of the International Astronomical Union, the organization charged with awarding official names to moon craters and other features on worlds around the solar system. She started underlining craters named for women.  ''There was not much to underline,'' Ms. Forget said.  Of the 1,578 moon craters that had been named at that time, only 32 honored women (a 33rd was named in February).  ''I didn't expect 50 percent. I'm not that optimistic,'' she said. ''But 2 percent? I was really shocked.''  Having so few moon craters named for women makes a powerful statement, she said. ''It creates an atmosphere where you think women aren't contributing.''  In 2016, Ms. Forget embarked on a project called ''Women With Impact,'' drawing each crater named for a woman. Ms. Forget draws in a large notebook using graphite for detailing and black acrylic paint. She captures the likeness of craters on the near side of the moon, like Cannon and Mitchell, namesakes of 19th- and 20th-century women astronomers, by observing them with her eight-inch telescope. For craters like Resnik and Chawla, both named for women astronauts and located on the far side of the moon that's not visible from Earth, she bases her drawings on images taken by NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter.  Ms. Forget has completed so far 32 drawings. The pieces, all individually framed, have been displayed at an art gallery at Bishop's University in Sherbrooke, Quebec, and the Rio Tinto Alcan Planetarium in Montreal. ''Women With Impact'' is meant to highlight the underrepresentation of women in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) fields, Ms. Forget said. ''A crater is an absence of matter, a void,'' she said. ''That's a parallel with a void of women in STEM.''  Working with craters in two dimensions led Ms. Forget to add a third. ''I liked this idea of holding a moon crater in my hand,'' she said. In 2019, she began 3-D printing models of each crater featured in ''Women With Impact.'' Ms. Forget is now creating an inverted version of each one, essentially a stamp that preserves the crater's shape. ''I could do an outie,'' she said.  Ms. Forget is experimenting with different ways of affixing those stamps to the soles of shoes. She plans to ship the stamps to female scientists around the world and ask them to record their experiences creating their own craters in a project called ''One Small Step.'' As the director of the SETI Institute's Artists in Residence program, Ms. Forget intends to first reach out to women whose work focuses on astrobiology and exoplanets.  It's important to celebrate the contributions of living female scientists, Ms. Forget said. ''The 'Women With Impact' series honors historical women, but 'One Small Step' can honor and foreground women who are active in STEM fields now,'' she said.  As more moon craters are named for women, Ms. Forget plans to create additional drawings, 3-D models and stamps. She already has work to do -- one crater, Easley, was named in February for the computer scientist Annie Easley.  Catherine Neish, a planetary scientist at the University of Western Ontario, proposed the name Easley to the International Astronomical Union in January. (Her husband urged her to consider not only the name of a woman but also the name of a woman of color.) Dr. Neish had successfully proposed craters Pierazzo and Tharp in 2015 for Elisabetta Pierazzo and Marie Tharp, and she was aware of the small fraction of moon craters honoring women. ''I was gung ho to slowly chip away at that number,'' she said.  The paucity of moon craters honoring women is both surprising and not surprising, said Kelsi N. Singer, a planetary scientist at the Southwest Research Institute. Women generally weren't allowed to be scientists, engineers and explorers until the 20th century, she said. Because lunar craters are not typically named for living people, ''there's definitely a historical lag,'' Dr. Singer said.  Women are overrepresented when it comes to the names of features on Venus and some of Uranus's smaller moons. But those places are exceptions in the solar system. The International Astronomical Union has acknowledged this issue and is prioritizing women's names when naming moon craters.  ''We decided that if we have the choice and the chance to name a crater after a woman, we do it,'' said Rita Schulz, a planetary scientist at the European Space Research and Technology Centre in the Netherlands and chair of the union's Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature.  Dr. Neish already has another name in mind for a moon crater. ''Very few people can name craters because they don't have a valid scientific reason for doing so,'' she said. ''I want to use my privilege to recognize some of these women who have come before me.''  A drawing of the lunar crater Resnik by Bettina Forget, an artist and researcher at Concordia University in Montreal. The crater is named for Judith Resnik, an astronaut who died in the 1986 Challenger disaster. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bettina Forget FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0005q "
44		"   GUEST ESSAY  Immigration Lies, Past and Present  By Daniela Gerson  1,385 words 27 April 2021   23     I felt like I was spying on my grandparents' lies.  ''The Blumstein family, consisting of Mr. B, age 43, his wife, same age, and their two children, ages 6½ and 2½ arrived in the United States on 12/21/50,'' begins the social worker's minutely detailed account of my grandparents', and my father's, first weeks as refugees in the United States.  But my grandparents and their children weren't the Blumstein family. The Blumsteins were in Israel. The Jewish refugee family -- described by the attentive social worker as ''attractive'' and ''charming,'' who arrived with $30 in cash and a baby's bathtub -- were the Gerzons. The child traveling as Abraham Blumstein, 6½, was a 5½-year-old whose birth name was Elik. He was my father. His identity, along with his parents', had been erased for a chance to enter the United States.  Nearly 70 years later, in what would turn out to be my father's final year, he was working furiously on a memoir. It was as if he already knew a rare and ruthless neurodegenerative disease would eat away at his mind. In those final lucid months, rather than focus on the professional legacy that would later headline his obituaries -- he was well known in Washington for his work carving a legal path to sue foreign countries for sponsoring terrorism, most famously in the case of Pan Am Flight 103 -- he wrestled with personal questions of ethics and immigration law.  My father knew all too well what happens when legal pathways do not exist for people to enter this country: They find alternative ways in, just as his own family had. As refugee admissions remain at historic lows, my father is no longer with us. But he left behind a warning that changes need to be made to immigration laws, seeded in the unlikely intersection of the lies of his parents, Holocaust survivors both, and his early career turn as a Nazi hunter for the U.S. government.  My father was born stateless in Uzbekistan in 1945, as World War II was winding down. His Polish-born Jewish parents had spent years in flight -- first to Russia in 1939, when Hitler invaded their home country, only to be deported via cattle cars into forced labor in Siberia. My father's older brother perished of diphtheria during the war. Postwar, my grandparents boarded trains west, but at the Polish border heard the news that nearby villagers had murdered Jews who returned and gave up on their plan to reclaim their home.  So began the lies of desperation. For five years, the Gerzons languished in displaced persons camps in Austria and Germany. They heard Foehrenwald, in the American zone of Germany, both had better conditions and bettered their chance of receiving a visa to enter the United States. But the door to the camp was shut. On the black market they found a way in: The Blumsteins, a family like them, had received permission to enter the camp but instead left for Palestine. The Gerzons thus bought the identities -- and opportunities -- of the Blumsteins. Once inside Foehrenwald, fearful of the consequences of their fraud, they continued their quest for safe haven in the United States under their assumed names. In 1950, President Harry Truman finally broadened quotas enabling more Polish Jewish displaced persons like them to enter. That December they arrived in New York Harbor.  Once in the United States, my father and his brother weren't told their true names. For the next six years he would be known as Abie Blumstein. Mystified about why he was not preparing for his bar mitzvah, he pressed his parents until he finally learned the truth.  His parents, with the help of a lawyer, took the chance of exposing their fraud to be naturalized under their real names and began anew. As he turned 13 he was able to choose an American name for himself: His third and final name would be Allan Gerson.  If my father's family had a guiding ethos, it was ''Never forget, never forgive.'' In 1979, as a trial attorney at the U.S. Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations (O.S.I.), my father had an opportunity to live those words. He was tasked with hunting Nazis.  My father should have felt great satisfaction in his role; he was, after all, avenging the gassing deaths of his cousins, aunts and uncles, grandparents, making men pay for the terror that haunted his parents. Yet, the shadow of his own family's lies quickly made him question the government's tactics.  It turned out that the immigration trespasses of those who could have marched my great-grandparents to their deaths, from a legal perspective, were often not so different from those of my grandparents. Both were guilty of material misrepresentation. My father did not prosecute Nazis based on their wartime crimes, but rather because they had lied on immigration forms about their role in assisting in persecution of civilians. Never mind that many were low-level Nazi collaborators who faced death if they did not follow the sergeant in charge. The consequences of deporting someone labeled a Nazi to the Soviet Union, where many of those prison guards recruited from formerly Nazi occupied countries would have been returned, were not considered.  ''Misrepresentation in visa and citizenship applications is a matter of U.S. immigration law, and few if any of the normal due process rights accorded to defendants in criminal trials apply,'' my father wrote in his memoir, ''Lies That Matter,'' which will be published next month. ''And so deportations to the U.S.S.R. followed by a firing squad were seen as not really 'punitive,' as if lives were not at stake.'' To my father this was not justice: The immigration system did not take into consideration whether the punishment fit the crime. He left O.S.I. after 18 months.  Make no mistake, my neoconservative father was no bleeding heart backer of open borders. In 1986, the year President Ronald Reagan provided permanent legal status for 2.7 million immigrants, my father left his job as senior counsel to the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and moved to the Office of Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice, but immigration does not appear in his writing on the period. I do remember a moment, a few years later, as we watched nightly news reporting on asylum seekers on boats coming from Haiti. ''We can't let them all in,'' said my father, as he explained the situation to me.  Yet, in his later years, he identified increasingly with the plight of minors without legal status, brought to the United States like him under the cover of their parents' lies. ''I was an illegal immigrant,'' he wrote in The Washington Post in 2017. ''I was little different from those who bear the designation dreamer today.''  It wasn't the first time he saw himself in these stories. A few years earlier, he took on the case of a Honduran asylum seeker acquaintance who maintained he would face extortion and execution by the local police if deported. My father lost the case, shocked by the lack of discretion judges have in immigration court and the overall chaos of the system.  My father had come to recognize that in contrast to what so many of today's most vulnerable immigrants face, the system his family encountered ultimately supported them. He also knew intimately that lives are at stake.  As my father warned us in his final writings, if the United States does not create a legal system for immigration that understands what desperation pushes people to do, and creates just responses, everyone loses.  Daniela Gerson is an assistant professor of journalism at California State University, Northridge, and a co-founder of Migratory Notes, a weekly immigration newsletter.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPHS FROM GERSON FAMILY)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00039 "
45		"   LETTER  Police Liability Insurance  216 words 27 April 2021   22     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  ''New Police Reform Laws Seize on Calls for Change'' (front page, April 19) details how complex and multilayered policing is in America. Much could be accomplished if federal law simply removed police ''qualified immunity'' and mandated significant individual liability insurance as a condition of employment.  Like needing automobile liability insurance to drive, the police would need liability insurance to work. Insurers will, in their own financial interest, drop dangerous cops. Derek Chauvin, who had a checkered policing career, would have likely lost his insurance and his job long before he knelt on George Floyd's neck.  Driving has been made less dangerous by insurers lobbying for safer cars and safer conditions. They punish dangerous drivers with high premiums and loss of coverage and reward good drivers. The same incentives would work in policing.  Bad cops are expensive. Minneapolis has paid out at least $71 million over the past 15 years to settle claims of officer misconduct. This is likely only a small portion of the actual cost when adding the expense of the protests that bad policing engenders. Insurance would be quite inexpensive by comparison.  Jon Bogle  Williamsport, Pa.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Victor J. Blue for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003h "
46		"   KATHLEEN KINGSBURY  Why We're Retiring the Term 'Op-Ed'  By Kathleen Kingsbury  855 words 27 April 2021   22     The first Op-Ed page in The new_york_times greeted the world on Sept. 21, 1970. It was so named because it appeared opposite the editorial page and not (as many still believe) because it would offer views contrary to the paper's. Inevitably, it would do that, too, since its founders were putting out a welcome mat for ideas and arguments from many points on the political, social and cultural spectrums from outside the walls of The Times -- to stimulate thought and provoke discussion of public problems.  That important mission remains the same. But it's time to change the name. The reason is simple: In the digital world, in which millions of Times readers absorb the paper's journalism online, there is no geographical ''Op-Ed,'' just as there is no geographical ''Ed'' for Op-Ed to be opposite to. It is a relic of an older age and an older print newspaper design.  So now, at age 50, the designation will be retired. Editorials will still be called editorials, but the articles written by outside writers will be known as ''Guest Essays,'' a title that will appear prominently above the headline.  ''Op-Ed'' has had a great run. It became a standard for the rest of our industry, and enormously popular among readers and contributors alike. It's hard now to recall that the original editors were actually nervous at its inception and worried whether anyone would be moved to contribute. But as an essay marking the page's 20th birthday observed, ''It was as if the Gray Lady had hit the dance floor.'' Contributions poured in, and by its 40th, nearly 15,000 Op-Ed pages had been printed.  The impulses that made Op-Ed successful from the get-go are still in play. One is the allure of clashing opinions well expressed. As Herbert Bayard Swope, an editor at the New York World newspaper in the 1920s who was a pioneer of the concept of an op-ed page, once said, ''Nothing is more interesting than opinion when opinion is interesting.'' Or in the words of John B. Oakes, a long-ago predecessor of mine who drove the creation of Op-Ed, ''Diversity of opinion is the lifeblood of democracy. ... The minute we begin to insist that everyone think the same way we think, our democratic way of life is in danger.''  That remains true, at a critical moment when the geography of the public square is being contested. In many ways, that square is more representative. Everyone has an outlet, from Facebook to Substack to Twitter. That is to be welcomed, even if the volume of voices is sometimes overwhelming. What is disappearing, though, are spaces where voices can be heard and respected, where ideas can linger a while, be given serious consideration, interrogated and then flourish or perish.  To champion thoughtful discussion, Times Opinion insists on a set of principles. We enforce rules for grammar and style. We demand certain standards of cogent argument, logical thought and compelling rhetoric. We require transparency about the identities of writers and their motives.  At the same time, we are not an unthinking assembly line or disinterested referees: We want not only individual essays to have intention, but also the collective report itself to have intention. We like the people we invite to write essays for us to sometimes be surprised by the offer. We like to experience the same surprise when we read submissions from voices who are new to us, on topics we may not yet understand. And we have our thumb on our scale in the name of progress, fairness and shared humanity.  We also work hard to keep our readers engaged. Opinion writing in 2021 is a collaborative project, one that is dynamic and not static.  Hence the new Guest Essay label. Readers immediately grasped this term during research sessions and intuitively understood what it said about the relationship between the writer and The Times. It reflects our mission to invite and convene a wide range of voices and views.  It may seem strange to link changes in our design to the quality of the conversation we are having today. Terms like ''Op-Ed'' are, by their nature, clubby newspaper jargon; we are striving to be far more inclusive in explaining how and why we do our work. In an era of distrust in the media and confusion over what journalism is, I believe institutions -- even ones with a lot of esteemed traditions -- better serve their audiences with direct, clear language. We don't like jargon in our articles; we don't want it above them, either.  A half century ago, Times editors made a bet that readers would appreciate a wider range of opinion. We are making much the same bet, but at a time when the scales of opinion journalism can seem increasingly tilted against the free and the fair, the sober and honest. We work every day to correct that imbalance.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ben Wiseman FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003j "
47		"   PERSONAL HEALTH  Crohn's Disease Is on the Rise  By Jane E. Brody  1,179 words 27 April 2021   7     Many think the abdominal disorder starts in childhood, but it can occur at any age and is becoming more prevalent throughout the world.  Shelley Martin, a Manhattan accountant, was in her mid-60s when she learned after a routine colonoscopy that she had Crohn's disease, a chronic inflammatory disorder characterized by abdominal pain and diarrhea. She said when friends learned of her diagnosis, several said ''How can that be? Crohn's starts in childhood.''  Actually, this often debilitating disease, which typically affects the area where the small intestine joins the colon, can occur at any age. ''If you're born with the right genetics, it can first appear in young kids to people in their 80s or 90s,'' said Dr. Joseph D. Feuerstein, gastroenterologist at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. ''It's rising in incidence and prevalence throughout the world,'' he said, and gastroenterologists are still trying to figure out why it shows up when it does in different people.  Crohn's disease was first described in 1932 by Dr. Burrill B. Crohn and colleagues and is one of two chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (ulcerative colitis is the other) that have no specific cause. Together, they afflict about three million people in the United States. Crohn's in adults starts on average at age 30, with peak incidence between ages 20 and 30 and a second peak around age 50. The disease tends to run in families, but the genetic risk is not large. One in 10 to one in four patients have a close family member who is affected, and only half of identical twin pairs get it.  In decades past, Crohn's was thought to primarily afflict people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, but ''we're now seeing it everywhere -- in Asia, Latin America, all over the world,'' said Dr. Feuerstein.  Experts speculate that its rise is somehow linked to industrialization and a Western-style diet rich in meats and processed foods. Some suggest a link to living in an overly hygienic environment that may prompt the immune system to attack the body's healthy tissues instead of infectious organisms.  And even though the bowel is the disease's most prominent target, ''it can also involve the eyes, joints, liver, skin,'' said Dr. Gary R. Lichtenstein, gastroenterologist at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. ''It's not one distinct disorder -- over 200 genes have been identified as associated with Crohn's. It results from a complex interaction between the environment and genetics'' and can be initiated by an individual's response to exposures ranging from infectious agents to medications.  Two well-established instigators are the frequent use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), like ibuprofen and naproxen, and cigarette smoking. Both can trigger onset of the disease or cause flare-ups in those who already have it, Dr. Lichtenstein said. In fact, he said, smoking not only creates a greater risk of developing Crohn's, it can also result in a more virulent course of the disease.  Unlike Ms. Martin, who had no inkling anything was wrong until her routine colon exam, most people with Crohn's have unexplained symptoms for many months or even years before the correct cause is determined. Following the diagnosis, she said she developed ''mild but annoying diarrhea,'' but she considers herself relatively lucky given the potential complex of symptoms associated with Crohn's.  In addition to abdominal pain and diarrhea that can be bloody, possible signs and symptoms include unexplained weight loss, anemia, fever, fatigue, nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite, eye and joint pain and tender, red bumps on the skin. In children, the disease can result in a failure to grow.  Prompt diagnosis and appropriate therapy to suppress inflammation in the digestive tract are extremely important because a delay can result in scar tissue and strictures that are not reversed by medication, Dr. Feuerstein said. Another possible serious complication is development of a fistula -- an abnormal connection between different organs, like the colon and bladder, requiring surgical repair that, in turn, can cause further intestinal damage.  Understandably, considerable stress, anxiety and depression can accompany the disease and may even cause a worsening of symptoms. Last summer, when Ms. Martin's disease suddenly raged out of control after she was treated with a drug to keep breast cancer at bay, severe diarrhea kept her tied to the bathroom in her Manhattan apartment. Dr. Lichtenstein said the class of drugs Ms. Martin took, called checkpoint inhibitors, is especially challenging to Crohn's patients who may have to choose between trying to prevent a recurrence of cancer and suppressing their intestinal disease because the cancer drugs can sometimes cause an inflamed colon.  If severe inflammation and debilitating symptoms are present when Crohn's is diagnosed, patients are usually treated with steroids to bring the disease under control before they are placed on medication specific for the condition. ''Steroids,'' Dr. Feuerstein said, ''are a Band-Aid to arrest the inflammatory process, but then we have to do something to suppress the disease and allow the body to heal.''  Sometimes before starting medication, patients are temporarily placed on a restricted liquid diet to rest the bowel and give it a chance to heal, said Dr. Lichtenstein, the lead author of the latest management guidelines for Crohn's disease developed by the American College of Gastroenterology.  There are now multiple drug options for treating Crohn's, although keeping symptoms under control often involves trial and error. For example, following Ms. Martin's diagnosis five years ago, the specialist she consulted told her there were four possible oral drugs to try in succession. Each worked for several months, but after the fourth drug no longer relieved her symptoms, she was given an infusion of a remedy called Entyvio, which she said ''worked immediately like a miracle.''  Entyvio, the trade name for vedolizumab, is what's known as a biologic, a drug made from living cells that is typically given by infusion or injection, one of several such drugs now available for Crohn's. It acts specifically on the gut to counter inflammation, and with her colon still inflamed, Ms. Martin needs to be treated with the drug every four weeks. If this one stops working, she can try one of the others.  Ms. Martin knows, however, that Crohn's is not curable and most patients have to stay on medication indefinitely. That can create yet another stumbling block. The biologics are very costly, averaging over $100,000 a year, and although they are usually covered by insurance, there is a steep co-payment. To afford the therapy, many patients depend on co-pay assistance programs administered by the drug companies, Dr. Feuerstein said.  However, as Ms. Martin recently learned, Medicare will cover the expense if she gets the infusion in a hospital or if her doctor can arrange for a nurse to come to her home to administer the drug.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gracia Lam FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003k "
48		"   PHYS ED  With Sore Muscles, Hold the Ice?  By Gretchen Reynolds  920 words 27 April 2021   6     After a particularly vigorous workout or sports injury, many of us rely on ice packs to reduce soreness and swelling in our twanging muscles. But a cautionary new animal study finds that icing alters the molecular environment inside injured muscles in detrimental ways, slowing healing. The study involved mice, not people, but adds to mounting evidence that icing muscles after strenuous exercise is not just ineffective; it could be counterproductive.  Check inside the freezers or coolers at most gyms, locker rooms or athletes' kitchens and you will find ice packs. Nearly as common as water bottles, they are routinely strapped onto aching limbs after grueling exercise or possible injuries. The rationale for the chilling is obvious. Ice numbs the affected area, dulling pain, and keeps swelling and inflammation at bay, which many athletes believe helps their aching muscles heal more rapidly.  But, in recent years, exercise scientists have started throwing cold water on the supposed benefits of icing. In a 2011 study, for example, people who iced a torn calf muscle felt just as much leg pain later as those who left their sore leg alone, and they were unable to return to work or other activities any sooner. Similarly, a 2012 scientific review concluded that athletes who iced sore muscles after strenuous exercise -- or, for the masochistically minded, immersed themselves in ice baths -- regained muscular strength and power more slowly than their unchilled teammates. And a sobering 2015 study of weight training found that men who regularly applied ice packs after workouts developed less muscular strength, size and endurance than those who recovered without ice.  But little has been known about how icing really affects sore, damaged muscles at a microscopic level. What happens deep within those tissues when we ice them, and how do any molecular changes there affect and possibly impede the muscles' recovery?  So, for the new study, which was published in March in the Journal of Applied Physiology, researchers at Kobe University in Japan and other institutions, who long had been interested in muscle physiology, gathered 40 young, healthy, male mice. Then, using electrical stimulation of the animals' lower legs to contract their calf muscles repeatedly, they simulated, in effect, a prolonged, exhausting and ultimately muscle-ripping leg day at the gym.  Rodents' muscles, like ours, are made up of fibers that stretch and contract with any movement. Overload those fibers during unfamiliar or exceptionally strenuous activities and you damage them. After healing, the affected muscles and their fibers should grow stronger and better able to withstand those same forces the next time you work out.  But it was the healing process itself that interested the researchers now, and whether icing would change it. So they gathered muscle samples from some animals immediately after their simulated exertions and then strapped tiny ice packs onto the legs of about half of the mice, while leaving the rest unchilled. The scientists continued to collect muscle samples from members of both groups of mice every few hours and then days after their pseudo-workout, for the next two weeks.  Then they microscopically scrutinized all of the tissues, with a particular focus on what might be going on with inflammatory cells. As most of us know, inflammation is the body's first response to any infection or injury, with pro-inflammatory immune cells rushing to the afflicted area, where they fight off invading germs or mop up damaged bits of tissue and cellular debris. Anti-inflammatory cells then move in, quieting the inflammatory ruction, and encouraging healthy new tissue to form. But inflammation is often accompanied by pain and swelling, which many people understandably dislike and use ice to dampen.  Looking at the mouse leg muscles, the researchers saw clear evidence of damage to many of the muscles' fibers. They also noted, in the tissue that had not been iced, a rapid muster of pro-inflammatory cells. Within hours, these cells began busily removing cellular debris, until, by the third day after the contractions, most of the damaged fibers had been cleared away. At that point, anti-inflammatory cells showed up, together with specialized muscle cells that rebuild tissue, and by the end of two weeks, these muscles appeared fully healed.  Not so in the iced muscle, where recovery seemed markedly delayed. It took seven days in these tissues to reach the same levels of pro-inflammatory cells as on day three in the unchilled muscle, with both the clearance of debris and arrival of anti-inflammatory cells similarly slowed. Even after two weeks, these muscles showed lingering molecular signs of tissue damage and incomplete healing.  The upshot of this data is that ''in our experimental situation, icing retards healthy inflammatory responses,'' says Takamitsu Arakawa, a professor of medicine at Kobe University Graduate School of Health Sciences, who oversaw the new study.  But, as Dr. Arakawa points out, their experimental model simulates serious muscle damage, such as a strain or tear, and not simple soreness or fatigue. The study also, obviously, involved mice, which are not people, even if our muscles share a similar makeup. In future studies, Dr. Arakawa and his colleagues plan to study gentler muscle damage in animals and people.  But for now, his study's findings suggest, he says, that damaged, aching muscles know how to heal themselves and our best response is to chill out and leave the ice packs in the cooler.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY MELODY MELAMED FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0002z "
49		"    Here to Help; A Recipe for Cheddar-Stuffed Turkey Burger With Avocado  By Sarah Copeland  373 words 27 April 2021   3     The burgers in this recipe, stuffed with cheese and a bit of butter, are moist and flavorful and, best of all, hold together and flip easily.  Time: 25 minutes  Yield: 4 servings  1¼ pounds lean ground turkey  1 teaspoon kosher salt  ½ teaspoon black pepper  1 teaspoon dried parsley  1 egg, lightly beaten  1 tablespoon milk  2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more for cooking  5 (1-ounce) slices sharp Cheddar or horseradish Cheddar  4 Hawaiian hamburger buns  1 to 2 firm-ripe avocado, thinly sliced  Mayonnaise or other burger toppings (pickles, lettuce, tomato, mustard), to taste  1. Combine the turkey, salt, pepper and parsley in a large bowl and mix with a fork or clean hands to season evenly. Add the egg and milk, and stir to combine.  2. Divide the meat into four portions with damp hands and gently pack into four round patties, about ¾-inch thick. (It will feel very sticky because of the egg, which helps the burgers hold their shape as they cook.) Place burgers on a parchment-lined baking tray or plate. Cut the butter into slices and 1 slice of the cheese into 4 thin squares, about 1 inch across. (The butter and cheese should be the same size.) Press a piece of each into the center of each burger. Shape the meat around it to cover across the top. Refrigerate for 10 minutes while you prepare the griddle.  3. Heat a flat-top griddle or cast-iron skillet over medium-high. Add enough butter to just lightly coat the griddle or pan. Add the burgers to the griddle. Cook until browned and a thermometer inserted into the meat (not the cheese in the center) reaches 165 degrees, about 4 minutes per side. In the final 2 minutes of cooking, add the remaining 4 cheese slices to the burgers, to melt.  4. Remove the burgers from the heat and layer onto the buns with the avocado and any other toppings you desire. Serve warm.  For more recipes, visit NYT Cooking  at nytcooking.com.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROMULO YANES FOR THE new_york_times; FOOD STYLING: VIVIAN LUI)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00054 "
50		"   PROFILES IN SCIENCE  A New View of the Womb  By Rachel E. Gross  3,198 words 27 April 2021   1     CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- Most labs devoted to women's diseases are accompanied by obvious symbols of womanhood: a rose, a tulip, an hourglass silhouette. Not Linda Griffith's. Tucked away in the building for biological engineering, the M.I.T. Center for Gynepathology Research is marked only by the letters CGR in red and black, the G formed from a curved arrow representing the hand of the engineer.  ''We needed something that wasn't all pink and flowers,'' said Dr. Griffith, the lab's director. ''We really thought it should be, like, 'This is science.'''  Dr. Griffith founded the lab in 2009 with the goal of helping researchers solve endometriosis, a chronic disorder in which tissue similar to that which normally lines the uterus instead grows outside it. The disease strikes one in 10 women, as well as trans men and nonbinary people who menstruate. Its hallmarks are extreme pain and, in some cases, infertility.  Yet it suffers from a branding problem: It falls into the abyss of ''women's diseases'' (overlooked), diseases that don't kill you (unimportant) and menstrual problems (taboo). Researchers often call endometriosis ''benign,'' as in noncancerous -- but doing so, Dr. Griffith believes, lessens the seriousness of a common, painful disease.  Her mission is to change the conversation, from one of women's pain to one of biomarkers, genetics and molecular networks. ''I don't want to make endometriosis a women's issue,'' she told the M.I.T. Tech Review in 2014. ''I want to make it an M.I.T. issue.''  Dr. Griffith, spry at 60, with a fringe of blonde hair and a slight Georgia drawl, is uniquely poised to help effect that transition. She started her career in bioengineering, sculpting organs like liver and bone from scratch by seeding polymer scaffolds with living cells. In 1997, she helped create an iconic creature called the ''earmouse'' by injecting a human ear-shaped scaffold with cartilage from a cow's knee, and growing it on the back of a lab mouse.  Now she brings those skills to the task of better understanding the uterus. In her lab, she has begun growing uterine organoids -- tiny domed droplets, with glands that look like swirling craters -- from the uterine cells of endometriosis patients. These ''patient avatars'' are ideal tools for testing potential new treatments for the disease: Biologically, they are closer to human uterine cells than those of mice (which don't naturally menstruate). And they enable researchers to sidestep the ethical issues that would arise with human trials.  ''That's really the power of this,'' Dr. Griffith said. ''You can take patients who we know how they respond or do not respond to therapies, and compare and start to understand and tease apart why that is.''  Her research highlights what a remarkable organ the uterus truly is -- and not just during its signature function, pregnancy. Humans, unlike almost every other mammal, shed their entire endometrium -- the womb's inner lining -- once a month and grow it back, whether or not a fertilized egg takes hold.  Dynamic, resilient and prone to reinvention, the uterus offers a window into some of biology's greatest secrets: tissue regeneration, scarless wound healing and immune function. ''The endometrium is inherently regenerative,'' Dr. Griffith said. ''So studying it, you're studying a regenerative process -- and how it goes wrong, in cases.''  Now, her work ''is drawing the interest of those who have never worked on or never thought about endometriosis,'' said Dr. Stacey Missmer, a reproductive biologist at Michigan State University and co-director of the Boston Center for Endometriosis. Essentially, Dr. Missmer said, Dr. Griffith is saying: ''All you cool kids in the other disciplines, this is a really interesting area to ask questions.''  A name for the pain  Before Dr. Griffith turned her scientific lens on the womb, she spent years trying to avoid thinking about the pain it caused her. For nearly three decades doctors dismissed her symptoms -- stomach-turning nausea, stabbing pelvic pain and alarming levels of blood loss during her period -- as just part of being a woman.  ''I felt like I was being gaslighted,'' she said.  She grew up fearless, a tree-climbing Girl Scout in Valdosta, Ga. In high school, she sewed her own clothes, earned a black belt in karate and fixed her family's car radiator. ''There was nothing we couldn't do, whether we were male, female, whatever,'' said her younger sister, Susan Berthelot. ''We had a lot of confidence, and a lot of love, and a lot of freedom.''  But when Dr. Griffith hit puberty, her body began imposing limitations. Her period was so agonizing it would leave her curled in the fetal position for days. When she was 13, a gynecologist prescribed birth control pills, a scandalous proposition. ''In the South especially, it was not done,'' she said. Her mother, at a loss, gave her gin.  Unable to control what was going on inside her body, she focused on what she could control: math, and building things. She went to Georgia Tech on a scholarship to study chemical engineering. But she found herself failing tests when she was on her period, and going to the infirmary to get monthly shots of the opioid Demerol.  By the time she began graduate studies at the University of California, Berkeley, she had developed an elaborate period regimen: She wore all-black outfits, inserted three Super Plus tampons and swallowed upward of 30 Advil tablets a day. But her pain kept increasing. When she consulted a male doctor, he took one look at her black leather jacket, pixie cut and Bugatti motorcycle and diagnosed her as ''rejecting her femininity.''  Her real diagnosis came by accident. In November 1988, soon after she went to M.I.T. as a postdoc, she checked into the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston to drain a small cyst on her left ovary. She woke up the next day to find a row of staples along her midriff, holding together a six-inch incision.  Her gynecologist told her she had a disease called endometriosis, which had fused her pelvic organs together with a sticky, speckled tissue that resembled the lining of her uterus. This rogue tissue responded to her monthly hormone cycle, swelling, shedding and attempting to bleed; that was the origin of the pain.  Surgeons had burned or scraped off as much of the tissue as possible; there was little else they could do. In 1940, the gynecologist who gave endometriosis its name, Dr. John Sampson, deemed the disease ''tantalizingly alluring and elusive.'' A half-century later, not much had changed. There was no cure, and researchers still didn't know exactly how endometriosis took root.  Still, Dr. Griffith treated the diagnosis as good news. ''To have someone tell me something was wrong with me, it was a huge relief,'' she said.  Her gynecologist presented two options: She could go on Danazol, a hormone-blocking drug that would halt the growth of the disease but would also send her body into a menopause-like state; or she could get pregnant, a common recommendation in the 1980s, and not uncommon today.  The medical reasoning -- which has since been questioned -- was that by temporarily stopping menstruation, pregnancy could reduce symptoms and slow or reverse the growth of lesions. ''It was almost viewed as a two-for-one benefit,'' said Dr. Elizabeth Stewart, who performed Dr. Griffith's first surgery. ''It's clear there was some sexism in the approach to endometriosis then. I think there's still some now.''  Dr. Griffith recalls her then-husband answering for her: ''We'll have a baby.''  She opted for the Danazol. Eight years later, she divorced the husband.  Soon she was jump-starting the field of biological engineering, developing technologies to 3D-print organ scaffolds and growing artificial human ears on the backs of mice. She was an architect; her medium was the building blocks of life. But it never occurred to her to try to solve her own disease.  ''Psychologically, it wasn't something I wanted to think about,'' she said. ''I just wanted to pretend like it wasn't happening.''  A 'women's thing' worth doing  The turning point came in 2007, when a member of M.I.T.'s board of trustees, Susan Whitehead, asked her to speak at a Women in Science and Engineering luncheon about how her work on tissue engineering could benefit women.  Dr. Griffith was annoyed. ''I was working on all the things that guys were working on,'' she later recalled at a 2018 scientific meeting. ''It didn't ever occur to me to work on a women's thing.'' But Whitehead was a friend, so she agreed.  Near the end of the event, the moderator asked her where she saw herself in 10 years. Something welled up inside her. She had just had her eighth surgery for endometriosis, and had helped her 16-year-old niece, Caitlin, receive a diagnosis for endometriosis after years of having doctors attribute her symptoms to stress. Watching Caitlin go through the same ordeal ''made lava shoot out of my head,'' Dr. Griffith recalled recently.  ''I have a chronic disease called endometriosis,'' she blurted out to the luncheon audience, and mentioned her niece. ''There's no better treatment for her, 30 years younger than me, than there was for me when I was 16.'' If a major breakthrough in treatment didn't come soon, ''that's where I'm going to be in 10 years,'' she said. ''Maybe it'll be solved, but I don't think so.''  The audience broke into applause.  Dr. Griffith reset her goals. When it came to making liver and bone, ''so many other people could do them,'' she recalled. ''But there was this one thing only I could do.'' She had recently been awarded a MacArthur ''genius'' grant, which came with $500,000 for any research project.  In 2009, she used it toward opening the Center for Gynepathology Research, the only engineering lab in the nation to focus on endometriosis. (In October 2020, federal funding for endometriosis research doubled from $13 million to $26 million after Representative Abby Finkenauer of Iowa, 32, shared her own endometriosis journey on the House floor.)  At the launch event for the center, Padma Lakshmi, host of Top Chef and co-founder of the Endometriosis Foundation of America, lamented the lack of research on such a devastating disease.  ''I have to say, I'm really shocked that it's the first research center of its kind in America,'' she said. ''That is stunningly bad news on the one hand, that she's the first one doing it. On the other hand, better late than never. Thank God for Dr. Linda Griffith.''  A window into the womb  Imagine the uterus as an orange, with the lining as the rind: fluffy, living tissue that serves as a plush bedding for a potential embryo. Each month, triggered by a drop in the hormone progesterone, the lining sloughs off and grows anew, complete with delicate, spiraling blood vessels.  This process repeats itself swiftly, scarlessly, without a trace of injury, again and again, as many as 500 times in a woman's life. ''How the body can coordinate that is extraordinary,'' said Dr. Hilary Critchley, a reproductive biologist at the University of Edinburgh -- and still poorly understood.  But this remarkable dynamism, some researchers argue, is a double-edged sword. ''A little thing gets out of balance, and there you go,'' said Dr. Griffith.  Dr. Griffith's models offer a glimpse into what happens when the process goes wrong -- for instance, when this growing tissue takes root in places it shouldn't. Her bits of bioengineered tissue allow researchers to visualize the growth of lesions and systematically parse the role of immune cells, inflammation and hormones in the disease.  ''You're actually seeing in three dimensions what's going on inside the uterus and this gland formation and nerve formation,'' said endometriosis specialist Dr. Keith Isaacson, who co-directs her lab. ''That is incredibly exciting.'' (Dr. Isaacson, who has been Dr. Griffith's endometriosis surgeon since 2000, and provides the patients' cells for her models.)  With her background in systems engineering, Dr. Griffith sees the uterus not as an island but as an organ that interacts intimately with everything around it. To capture these systemic interactions, her team connects her models to other organs like bone marrow, gut and liver, and hopes one day to seed them with blood vessels, nerve cells and immune cells.  The insights from this research transcend the womb. For instance, one enduring mystery about the disease is how lesions can appear in places as far-flung as the lungs, eyes, spine and even the brain. Dr. Hugh Taylor, chair of the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at Yale School of Medicine, is investigating whether stem cells, which are plentiful in the uterine lining, could contribute to this process by circulating throughout the body.  Because uterine stem cells are relatively accessible, they could also be a boon to regenerative medicine. Dr. Taylor has shown that, like other stem cells, they can be grown in vitro into new neurons and insulin-making cells to treat diseases like Parkinson's and diabetes.  Another area ripe for improvement is diagnosis. One of the most frustrating aspects of endometriosis is that women typically wait seven to 10 years or more to learn that they have the disease, a process that requires invasive surgery. Now, researchers are developing a simple test to screen for genetic markers of endometriosis in menstrual blood and return a near-instant diagnosis.  Just a few milliliters of this blood, collected on a sponge, provides a wealth of markers of health and disease, said Christine Metz, an immunologist at Northwestern's Feinstein Institute who is developing the test with Peter Gregersen, a geneticist there. Besides endometriosis, it could also help doctors screen for pelvic inflammation, infertility, fibroids, environmental toxins and early cancer.  ''We were kind of surprised that it had been neglected as a natural resource,'' Dr. Metz said.  They soon discovered why. In 2018, Dr. Metz began approaching male gynecologists to ask their patients for menstrual samples, and ''some people said we were completely insane,'' she recalled. Others, she added, ''had never heard of a menstrual cup. Which was also, I'm going to say, disappointing.'' They began asking patients directly for samples, and have since enrolled 1,000 patients in their study.  One might well ask why more researchers have not focused on the uterus until recently. Bioengineers in particular have always taken an interest in tissues that regenerate and self-heal. ''And yet it took them how many decades to recognize that one of the most regenerative tissues is found inside the uterus?'' asked Kathryn Clancy, a biological anthropologist who studies reproduction at the University of Illinois.  The reason, she believes, is simple: ''Because none of the researchers had uteruses.''  Lessons from cancer  Three stone cherubs form an arc above the doorway to Dr. Griffith's kitchen in Cambridge, Mass. They were a gift from her mother, to commemorate the embryos that she and her current husband, Doug Lauffenburger, a systems biologist with whom she shares a lab at M.I.T., made in 1997 through in vitro fertilization. Endometriosis prevented the embryos from implanting.  She held on to her dream of having children, but in 2001, just after her 40th birthday, the pain in her abdomen grew unbearable. On Sept. 11, as the Twin Towers fell, she rushed to the hospital in a fog of painkillers and underwent a hysterectomy with Dr. Isaacson. (Endometriosis pain is the leading cause of hysterectomies for American women in their 30s.)  ''There was no decision,'' Dr. Griffith recalled. ''It was hysterectomy or death.''  Even after that, her disease returned, twice. Then in 2009, just after she had pivoted to studying endometriosis, she faced a new obstacle: cancer.  Dr. Griffith likes to say that compared to endometriosis, stage 4 breast cancer was a walk in the park. ''Not like a super-beautiful day -- like a stormy-day walk in the park,'' she added. ''But it was, like, people understood.'' Colleagues wrote her cards, sent her food, extended condolences. Her dean offered her a sabbatical semester.  Dr. Griffith soon learned that the way breast cancer research was categorized was far ahead of endometriosis. Doctors used molecular tests to classify patients into subtypes, which dictated which targeted treatment they should receive. With endometriosis, ''there's no metrics,'' she said. ''This was this huge thing for me that was so crystallizing.''  Dr. Griffith knew that her disease, like cancer, was not one disease but many, a medusa of waving tentacles. She began talking to Dr. Lauffenburger, who had been studying breast cancer for over a decade, about how to take a similar approach to classifying endometriosis patients.  Together, they identified networks of inflammatory markers that tended to be associated with more painful manifestations of the disease and fertility, and published their findings in Science Translational Medicines in 2014. The work was cited as the first step toward creating subtypes of the disease. ''That was really us together, because it was his vision of systems biology but filtered through my practical connection to the clinic,'' Dr. Griffith said.  For the next year, she held lab meetings from her hospital bed in between chemotherapy sessions. ''We transformed our lab meetings, literally,'' said Dr. Nicole Doyle, a postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Griffith's lab at the time. ''We just showed up for her chemo treatments and would sit there with her. That diagnosis had to adapt to her life, not the other way around.''  Throughout chemo, Dr. Griffith never seemed to waver in her positivity. When she shaved off her hair, she threw a lab party. But Dr. Lauffenburger found it excruciating to watch his wife suffer from this new foe, after battling the old one for so long.  When it came to cancer, ''I viewed it as a terrible thing,'' he said one evening over dinner at their home.  Dr. Griffith saw it differently: She took a curse and turned it into a gift.  ''It was a terrible thing,'' she allowed. ''But it was a good thing, scientifically.''  [ Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter. ]  The bioengineer Linda Griffith brings a very personal and practical connection to her work on endometriosis, which strikes one in 10 women, as well as trans men and nonbinary people who menstruate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ILANA PANICH-LINSMAN FOR THE new_york_times) (D1); Top, one of Linda Griffith's many motorcycles, circa 1988; a male doctor once diagnosed her pain as her ''rejecting her femininity.'' Center left is Alex Brown, a postdoctoral researcher in tissue engineering, in Dr. Griffith's lab. Center right are images taken during a laparoscopic exam after one of Dr. Griffith's endometriosis operations. Above are Clara Ives, left, and Lauren Baugh, right, with Dr. Griffith. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ILANA PANICH-LINSMAN FOR THE new_york_times; DUNCAN ALLISON O'BOYLE; DUNCAN ALLISON O'BOYLE) (D5)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00053 "
51		"    Amid Second Virus Wave, the World Responds to India's Distress Call  By Emily Schmall and Karan Deep Singh  1,568 words 27 April 2021   6     Countries, companies and powerful members of the diaspora have all pledged to pitch in, but it likely won't be enough to stop the unfolding catastrophe.  NEW DELHI -- Oxygen generators from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Raw material for coronavirus vaccines from the United States. Millions in cash from companies led by Indian-American businessmen.  As a second wave of the pandemic rages in India, the world is coming to the rescue.  But it is unlikely to plug enough holes in India's sinking health care system to fully stop the deadly crisis that is underway, and the health emergency has global implications for new infections worldwide, as well as for countries relying on India for the AstraZeneca vaccine.  ''It's a desperate situation out there,'' said Dr. Ramanan Laxminarayan, the founder and director of the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy, adding that donations will be welcome, but may only make a ''limited dent on the problem.''  In the early months of 2021, the government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi acted as if the coronavirus battle had been won, holding huge campaign rallies and permitting thousands to gather for a Hindu religious festival.  Now, Mr. Modi is striking a far more sober tone. He said in a nationwide radio address on Sunday that India has been ''shaken'' by a ''storm.''  Patients are suffocating in the capital, New Delhi, and other cities because hospitals' oxygen supplies have run out. Frantic relatives have appealed on social media for leads on intensive-care unit beds and experimental drugs. Funeral pyres have spilled over into parking lots and city parks.  Now, Mr. Modi appears to be looking to the rest of the world to help India quell its seemingly unstoppable coronavirus wave.  A global coronavirus surge, largely driven by the devastation in India, continues to break daily records and run rampant in much of the world, even as vaccinations steadily ramp up in wealthy countries. More than one billion shots have now been given globally.  On Sunday, the world's seven-day average of new cases hit 774,404, according to a new_york_times database, higher than the peak average during the last global surge, in January. Despite the number of shots given around the world, far too few of the global population of nearly eight billion have been vaccinated to slow the virus's steady spread.  Vaccinations have been highly concentrated in wealthy nations: 82 percent of shots worldwide have been given in high- and upper-middle-income countries, according to data compiled by the Our World in Data project. Only 0.2 percent of doses have been administered in low-income countries.  On Monday, India broke the world record for daily coronavirus infections for a fifth consecutive day, reporting nearly 353,000 new cases. And it added 2,812 deaths to its overall toll of more than 195,000, which experts say may be a vast undercount.  Earlier this month, Adar Poonawalla, the chief executive of the Serum Institute of India, the world's largest vaccine maker, made a direct appeal to President Biden on Twitter, asking him to ''lift the embargo'' on raw material used to make Covid-19 vaccines.  Tim Manning, the White House Covid-19 supply coordinator, said Monday on Twitter that the U.S. Defense Production Act, which Mr. Biden invoked in March, did not equate to an embargo.  ''Companies are able to export,'' Mr. Manning tweeted. ''In fact, companies that supply our vaccine manufacturing export their product all across the world.''  ''There is just more global manufacturing happening everywhere than the suppliers can support,'' he added.  Facing increased pressure, the White House said Sunday that it had removed impediments to the export of raw materials for vaccines and would also supply India with therapeutics, test kits, ventilators and personal protective gear.  ''Just as India sent assistance to the United States as our hospitals were strained early in the pandemic, we are determined to help India in its time of need,'' Mr. Biden said on Twitter.  The Biden administration then said Monday that it would share up to 60 million AstraZeneca doses from its stockpile with other countries in the coming months, so long as they clear a safety review being conducted by the Food and Drug Administration.  The U.S. surgeon general, Dr. Vivek Murthy, who announced the plan on Twitter, did not specify which countries would receive those doses.  Members of Congress had lobbied Mr. Biden to donate the AstraZeneca vaccine to India, since there is no shortage for Americans who want to be vaccinated with the three vaccines that have been authorized for emergency use there.  The extent of support the president offers India could lay the foundation for a Biden-Modi relationship at a time when the United States and China are both jockeying for influence with India and greater access to its enormous market.  Mr. Biden's response to India at its time of crisis has come under scrutiny, raising questions of how far the administration has actually moved away from former President Donald J. Trump's ''America First'' foreign policies.  The Serum Institute did not respond to questions about the White House's announcement.  Between bouts of the pandemic, when Mr. Modi's government thought the worst was behind it, India enacted a policy of vaccine diplomacy, selling or donating 66.4 million doses.  In late March as the domestic caseload began to creep upward, Mr. Modi suddenly stopped exports, crippling the vaccination campaigns of other countries reliant on made-in-India vaccine.  The Indian government is now holding back nearly all of the 2.4 million doses produced daily by the Serum Institute, one of the world's largest producers of the AstraZeneca vaccine. So far, only the U.S. has offered to fill some of the shortage.  Still, vaccine shortages have hobbled India's effort to protect its people. Only about 2 percent of the population has been fully inoculated.  Several other countries have also stepped up to offer support to India.  Britain pledged medical equipment, including 495 oxygen concentrators (devices that can extract oxygen from ambient air and provide it to patients) and 140 ventilators. France and Australia are considering sending oxygen supplies. Even Pakistan, with which India has fought several wars and maintains chilly relations, has offered X-ray machines, ventilators and other aid, its foreign minister, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, said.  Two Indian-American businessmen -- the chief executive of Microsoft, Satya Nadella, and the Google chief, Sundar Pichai -- have both said that their companies will provide financial assistance to India.  ''Devastated to see the worsening Covid crisis in India,'' Mr. Pichai wrote on Twitter, pledging $18 million to aid groups working in the country.  Indian officials have also been making direct requests of other countries. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, India's external affairs minister, tweeted last week about his meeting with Margrethe Vestager, the European Commission executive vice president who oversees digital policy. On Sunday, the European Union announced that it would provide oxygen and medicines.  ''The E.U. is pooling resources to respond rapidly to India's request for assistance via the E.U. Civil Protection Mechanism,'' Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, said on Twitter.  Mr. Jaishankar's spokesman did not respond to a request for comment on the assistance promised to India, but experts said it could only do so much.  In many cases, India has lagged behind other countries with its preparedness measures and ability to scale up care, triaging resources like oxygen that reach patients just in time or not at all.  ''Early and aggressive investments were absolutely necessary,'' said Krishna Udayakumar, an associate professor of global health and director of the Duke Global Health Innovation Center.  Unlike the United States and Britain, which signed advance purchase agreements for millions of doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine beginning last May, India waited until January, and then only bought 15.5 million doses produced by Serum and the pharmaceutical company Bharat Biotech -- a drop in the ocean for a country of nearly 1.4 billion people.  India had indicated as early as last September, at the height of the first wave, that it would rely heavily on Russia's Sputnik V vaccine, signing a deal to buy 100 million doses. But Sputnik won't be available in India until next month at the earliest.  If India were to dramatically ramp up its vaccine manufacturing capacity and give emergency authorization to other vaccine makers, it could potentially curb the worst effects of the second wave.  ''This is the only long-term solution,'' Dr. Laxminarayan said. ''India has the capability to do it, if the country puts its mind to it.''  Rebecca Robbins contributed reporting.  Rebecca Robbins contributed reporting.  Relatives of a person who died from the virus perform last rites in New Delhi on Saturday. On Monday, India broke the world record for a fifth consecutive day with nearly 353,000 new cases and added 2,812 deaths to its overall toll of more than 195,000.; A man receiving oxygen outside a Sikh house of worship in Delhi on Sunday. Britain has pledged to send medical equipment and France and Australia are considering sending oxygen supplies. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00050 "
52		"    Trying to Nix the Question: Which Moms Deserve Help?  By Emily Badger and Claire Cain Miller  1,621 words 27 April 2021   4     A groundbreaking child allowance stirs a debate among Republicans between promoting work and promoting traditional families.  American mothers have always been sorted and divided -- deemed worthy of aid or not -- by race, by class, by marital status, by what their husbands do, by whether they've had too many children or not enough.  All these fault lines, though, will be ignored by the federal government this summer when it begins delivering a monthly check of $250 to $300 per child to all but the richest families in the United States. It will go to families whether they have one parent or two, and whether their mothers have an income or not.  The benefit, an expansion of the child tax credit, is in place through the end of the year. It would be locked in through 2025 as part of the American Families Plan that President Biden is expected to unveil this week, the next step in what proponents hope will be a permanent expansion of the American safety net for families.  The simplicity of the plan cuts through old ideas of who's deserving, ''narratives that we know are grounded in stereotypes and moral measuring sticks,'' said Celeste Watkins-Hayes, a sociologist at the University of Michigan. Instead, the proposal ''just makes sure parents have the resources they need to raise their families.''  Yet the thing that makes the Biden child credit so revolutionary, its universality, is also what makes it controversial. Policymakers disagree on whether all families merit direct financial assistance from the government, or whether it should be reserved for parents -- including single mothers -- who work for pay.  The debate over time has not been about whether mothers should work or stay home with their children, but which mothers should work or stay home.  The answer, in American policies, has long depended on characteristics like their income, family structure and, especially, race, researchers said.  ''What it means essentially is that when white women stay home and work without pay for the family, that's a great thing,'' said Jacqueline Jones, a historian at the University of Texas at Austin. ''When Black women attempt to stay home and care for their children, if they don't have the means or the husband to do so, they're vilified.''  The question of work could be the largest obstacle to reimagining federal support for families. It adds to a growing tension on the right between promoting work and promoting traditional families: While some Republican policymakers, including Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, support a near-universal child credit, others, like Senators Marco Rubio and Mike Lee, believe it should have a work requirement.  A divide on the right  More Republicans have recently joined Democrats in agreeing that families with children need government support, as the problems families face have shifted. Teen parenthood has sharply declined. But the opioid crisis has ravaged rural families. Wages have stagnated for many families even when they have two working parents.  ''That's definitely created a degree of working-class consciousness on the right,'' said Samuel Hammond, the director of poverty and welfare policy at the Niskanen Center. ''Maybe in the '90s, when you talked about single moms, that was disproportionately a dog whistle for Black single moms. Now, if you're a Republican, you have plenty of single moms in your constituency.''  The pandemic has further made clear how much parents rely on outside support when raising children, and how quickly any family can fall into an economic or health crisis.  A deeper divide has also emerged on the right between social conservatives, who want to preserve traditional families, and economic conservatives, who want to limit government spending.  ''There's always been a lot of overlap between social and economic conservatives: Two-parent families are better off economically,'' said Angela Rachidi, who studies poverty and safety net policies at the American Enterprise Institute. ''But the last few years, social conservatives have become more open to using government spending in ways that make economic conservatives uncomfortable.''  She aligns with the economic conservatives, who cite evidence that work requirements can decrease child poverty and model a strong work ethic for children. She does not want government aid to encourage people to forgo work. (The previous child tax credit was not available in full to families with no or low income; the earnings threshold to start benefiting from that credit was $2,500 when the tax law passed in 2017.)  ''By lessening the importance of work,'' she said, ''we're harming the most vulnerable families.''  Social conservatives have become more open to government spending if it encourages more women to have children and enables them to stay home with them. They cite research that children benefit from strong attachment to their parents.  ''The right has dropped the ball on family policy,'' said Brad Wilcox, a sociologist at the University of Virginia, in a recent panel at A.E.I. where the divisions on the right were on full display. ''I'm not looking for more measures that will put parents into the labor force than spend time with their kids. We need less workism and more familyism.''  This is also why social conservatives generally do not support government funding for child care, while some economic conservatives do -- child care makes it easier for mothers to work.  The history of who's deserving  Debates over American motherhood, amplified by the pandemic, have deep roots. ''It really does go back to this idea that there's this assumption that certain women should work, and that Black women in particular should work,'' said Elisa Minoff, a senior policy analyst with the Center for the Study of Social Policy who has researched the history of work requirements.  Slavery laid the groundwork for the stereotype that Black people don't want to work, Ms. Minoff said, and helped establish a narrow conception of work: as servants, domestics and field hands. Throughout this history, Black women have been viewed more as laborers than as mothers, said the Cornell historian Louis Hyman (any virtue attached to the title of ''mother,'' he adds, invariably vanishes when a Black woman is a ''single mother'').  Black mothers were largely excluded from the earliest experiments in welfare after the Civil War, with widow's pensions specifically designed to keep women at home with their children. (If they were found to be working, they lost the benefit.)  In the 1930s, a federal program, Aid to Dependent Children, extended help to more mothers and replaced those pensions. But Southern Democrats demanded that states run the program, allowing them to set rules effectively barring Black mothers from benefits. State caseworkers would spot-check whether women were keeping their homes clean enough, or keeping a man around. Some states automatically kicked women and children off benefit rolls during picking seasons when they were needed in the fields.  Such standards, many enduring until the 1960s, weren't applied to white women. And it was only after they were struck down, and more Black mothers began to rely on the aid, that political momentum grew to attach work requirements.  ''It's a response to the program doing more to actually serve families of color that people start to say, 'These women should be working,''' said H. Luke Shaefer, a professor at the University of Michigan who studies poverty and social welfare policy.  The typical mother getting government help became, in politicians' telling, a ''welfare queen,'' with too many children and not enough personal responsibility. That stereotype led to the 1996 welfare reform law that attached time limits and stricter work requirements to cash assistance.  Employment of single mothers increased, and child poverty decreased in the following years. But both effects were helped by a booming economy in the late 1990s. And many mothers were left without jobs or government benefits, or in jobs that were precarious and poorly paid, while their children were often in low-quality child care.  In the debate over the Biden child allowance, policymakers have focused on its potential to decrease child poverty, a goal with support on both the right and the left. A variety of research shows that growing up in poverty has long-term consequences for children's physical and mental health, family stability, and educational and career outcomes.  ''If this expanded child tax credit becomes a permanent policy, it would really serve as a pillar of a reimagined social safety net, and one that actually is focused on promoting the well-being of children and families, not just increasing the number of hours parents worked,'' Ms. Minoff said.  Much of the debate, though, still reflects these old divides. Senators Rubio and Lee, who have supported expanding the child tax credit, want a work requirement because, as they said in a statement, ''an essential part of being pro-family is being pro-work.''  Many progressives, in addition to supporting a universal child benefit, say they also support work -- but that the way to encourage work and decrease poverty is to improve jobs, such as by increasing the minimum wage and providing predictable hours.  ''I would say to those who want to see work requirements as part of this benefit, move that impulse into building a stronger labor market,'' Professor Watkins-Hayes said. ''The universal child credit was a way to acknowledge the reality that the labor market isn't able to support families to make sure their kids are happy and progressing well.''  Social conservatives have become more open to government spending to support families, widening a divide with economic conservatives. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DESIREE RIOS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004y "
53		"   THE NEW OLD AGE  Many Older Adults Lack Helpful Devices  By Paula Span  1,435 words 27 April 2021   7     Railings, grab bars, shower chairs and other inexpensive devices can make it easier to continue living at home, but not enough older people acquire them.  In 2019, John Hancock had become so disabled after a hospitalization that he went close to a year without being able to take a bath or a shower. Using a walker, he could, with difficulty, move around the townhouse in Baltimore where he lived with his daughter and grandson. But because he felt too unsteady to climb into the tub, one of them had to help him with sponge baths.  Then a program at Johns Hopkins called CAPABLE (Community Aging in Place -- Advancing Better Living for Elders) sent a nurse, an occupational therapist and a repair person to provide some inexpensive assistive devices. ''It made a tremendous difference in my life,'' Mr. Hancock, a retired school cook, said.  Over several visits, the team asked about his needs and priorities and supplied a shower chair and a rubber bath mat. The repair person installed grab bars around the tub, attached a hand-held shower nozzle and added a railing next to the toilet. Mr. Hancock learned how to use it all.  ''I feel safe and I feel secure,'' he said recently. ''I don't have to call somebody to help me. I feel independent, and I've been independent all my life.'' Recovering well from a recent stroke, Mr. Hancock, now 64, can not only bathe on his own but can also cook for himself, manage stairs and go to church.  How many older adults could benefit from such simple, low-cost, nonprescription devices? And how many actually acquire them?  A team at the University of California, San Francisco, combed through national data and came up with an estimate, recently published in JAMA Internal Medicine: About 12 million people over 65, living in their own homes, could use equipment to help them safely bathe and use the toilet, two of the activities disabled older people most commonly struggle with. But about five million of them don't have those items, even though they generally cost less than $50.  Looking at Medicare beneficiaries in the National Health and Aging Trends Study in 2015, the researchers identified more than 2,600 people (average age: about 80) who needed such devices, based on measures like holding onto walls as they walked and being unable to rise unassisted from a chair.  ''They're not as nimble as they used to be,'' said Dr. Kenneth Lam, a geriatrician and lead author of the study. ''They're the parents you're starting to worry about.''  Of those who could have benefited from a shower chair and grab bars for bathing, 26 percent did not have either and only 40 percent had both. In the group who could have used a raised toilet or toilet seat, plus a grab bar for toilet use, 44 percent had neither and 24 percent had both. Extrapolating to the national population produced the five million estimate.  ''It's a technical problem which, unlike so much of aging, is actually solvable,'' Dr. Lam said. Yet after four years, the researchers found, many participants in need still had not acquired the equipment, or had died without it.  ''In the hospital, I can order an M.R.I. and charge the system thousands of dollars,'' Dr. Lam said. ''But down the road, that won't help patients not fall. What happens when they get home?''  Home is where older adults want to stay. Covid-19 and its predations and restrictions have made senior living facilities increasingly unpopular; occupancy rates in the first quarter of this year reached a record low, the National Investment Center for Seniors Housing and Care has reported.  Yet, ''there are people all over the country whose homes don't fit what they need,'' said Sarah Szanton, a nursing researcher at Johns Hopkins University and director of the decade-old CAPABLE program in Baltimore. Thirty-three similar programs now operate in 18 states.  What doctors and therapists (and families) worry about most in such cases are falls, a leading cause of hospitalization and disability for older people. Bathrooms, with their hard and slippery surfaces, pose a particular danger.  CAPABLE, deploying its multi-specialty team and a modest budget of $1,300 per household for repairs, equipment and installation, offers low-income residents not only bathroom equipment but also kitchen grabbers, well-anchored banisters and other useful articles.  And it pays off. ''On average, people's disability is cut in half,'' Dr. Szanton said. ''Their pain decreases. Their ability to bathe and dress improves. People stuck on the second floor of their houses for years can go on family trips.''  CAPABLE reduced Medicaid spending and could create Medicare savings as well. Participants reported that it helped them remain at home, made their homes safer and helped them care for themselves.  Elsewhere, users of assistive devices tell similar stories. ''We all know someone who had an aunt or a mother who couldn't get out of the tub or off the floor, and bad things happened,'' said Wendl Kornfeld, 72, who lives in Manhattan with her 83-year-old husband.  They had grab bars installed in their two showers for roughly $120 total, ''not a huge investment and worth it for peace of mind,'' Ms. Kornfeld said.  In Mt. Kisco, N.Y., Joan Potter appreciates the apartment renovations her late husband oversaw 20 years ago. He used a wheelchair, so their bathroom had a roll-in shower with a hand-held shower head, a raised toilet and grab bars in key locations. Now that Ms. Potter, 88, has undergone two hip replacements, she said, ''I'm so grateful I have all these things, because I'm not so agile myself anymore.''  Why don't more seniors take advantage of such devices?  Some adaptations that help people remain at home, like outdoor ramps and stair glides, carry high price tags; basic bathroom devices, widely available in pharmacies and online, generally don't. But cost can still present an obstacle.  ''Medicare covers 'durable medical equipment' -- hospital beds, wheelchairs, walkers,'' said Tricia Neuman, who leads the Kaiser Family Foundation's program on Medicare. ''It doesn't cover hand rails or grab bars, things used around the house.''  Medicare Advantage plans have more flexibility, but a Kaiser study found that of Advantage enrollees, only six percent were in plans that covered bathroom safety equipment.  A recently announced federal program from the Department of Housing and Urban Development will provide $30 million for a home modification program for low-income homeowners aged 62 and older, a helpful but small step.  Moreover, price isn't the only barrier to assistive equipment. ''You need whole systems to deliver it,'' Dr. Lam said. Sometimes, faced with the challenges of selecting the appropriate devices, ordering and installing them, ''even for people who want them, it just doesn't happen.''  And a lot of seniors don't want them. ''These are symbols to people that they're losing control,'' said Marcie Gleason, a social psychologist at the University of Texas at Austin who studies such issues. ''It feels like dependency to need these devices -- even though they probably help them remain independent.''  Karen Purze spent a decade caring for her late parents, who hoped to age in place in their Chicago home. She worried every time her father, undergoing cancer treatment in his late 70s, climbed in and out of an old-fashioned claw-foot bathtub without supports.  She suggested modifications, but ''he wouldn't listen.'' He'd say, '''I don't need that. I'm fine,''' Ms. Purze recalled. ''He was clinging tightly to every bit of independence.''  Trying to overcome that resistance, and simplifying the process of acquiring and using safety equipment, will require a multipronged effort, with more attention from primary care doctors, more programs like CAPABLE and shifts in Medicare policies.  But it may require changes in outlook, too. Ms. Purze, 50, and her husband are most likely years away from needing raised toilets and shower chairs -- but are already talking about them.  In their next house? ''Grab bars, for sure,'' she said. ''I've seen how important it is, in maintaining your independence, that your house helps you and doesn't hinder you.''  After having a stroke last year, John Hancock, through a program called CAPABLE, had grab bars, a shower chair, new railings and other inexpensive assistive devices installed in his home to help reclaim his independence. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROSEM MORTON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00032 "
54		"    E.U. Sues AstraZeneca Over Its Missing Doses  By Benjamin Mueller, Matina Stevis-Gridneff and Monika Pronczuk  1,146 words 27 April 2021   4     The legal action escalates a longstanding dispute over shortfalls in deliveries, even as Brussels is seeking to shift to other suppliers.  The European Union has sued AstraZeneca over what the bloc has described as delays in shipping hundreds of millions of doses of coronavirus vaccines, a sharp escalation of a longstanding dispute between the bloc and the maker of one of the world's most important vaccines.  AstraZeneca has said that it would be able to deliver only a third of the 300 million doses that European officials had been expecting by the end of June. As a result, European officials said on Monday that they believed AstraZeneca had broken its contract, and that they were seeking speedier deliveries than the company said it could muster.  The two sides' relationship had grown acrimonious in January when AstraZeneca slashed its expected deliveries for the first quarter of the year, setting back the bloc's vaccination campaign by weeks as cases picked up across the continent and political leaders faced scorching criticism for inadequate planning.  For AstraZeneca, whose cheap and easy-to-store shot is being used by 135 countries, the lawsuit could create further difficulties in a bruising stretch. No company had been as instrumental in the race to vaccinate poorer countries around the world, but AstraZeneca has been buffeted in recent weeks by the discovery of an exceedingly rare, though serious, side effect that has prompted restrictions on its use in parts of Europe.  At issue in the legal dispute was whether AstraZeneca had done everything in its power to meet its delivery schedule. Pascal Soriot, the company's chief executive, has said that the contract required only that it make its ''best efforts'' to deliver the purchased doses on time.  Vaccine production is a notoriously fickle science, with live cultures needing time to grow inside bioreactors, for instance. In an effort to supply doses not only to richer nations that had purchased them well in advance, but also to poorer nations, AstraZeneca had partnered with manufacturing sites around the world, rather than relying on only a few factories, as Pfizer and Moderna have.  AstraZeneca, which developed the vaccine with the University of Oxford, has also said that the European Commission, the bloc's executive branch, finalized its contract months after Britain did, giving the company less time to iron out any manufacturing difficulties.  Legal experts said that the ''best efforts'' language in the contract raised the burden on the Europeans to prove that AstraZeneca did not act diligently enough to supply the promised doses. But they also said that it did not entirely insulate the company from being deemed in breach of contract.  Geert Van Calster, a law professor at Leuven University specializing in contracts, said that the accelerated timetable of the legal proceedings -- the European Union said it expected a judgment in three to seven weeks -- meant that the courts would consider only what was apparent from an ''immediately obvious reading of the contract.''  That could make it more difficult for European officials to demand faster shipments. But Belgian courts, like many in continental Europe, consider not only the wording of a contract, but also its genesis, which could work to the advantage of the European Union.  ''A European judge looks at the good faith or lack of it that the parties brought into the contract, at the way in which the contract was negotiated, the general atmosphere,'' said Professor Van Calster. ''I think that the commission probably hopes that the judge will be able to determine that AstraZeneca, in particular, has failed to supply a number of vaccines which they could have reasonably supplied to the European Union.''  He said that the court could rule that AstraZeneca must surrender a certain number of doses, but that the outcome was uncertain.  AstraZeneca said on Monday that it ''regrets the European Commission's decision to take legal action over the supply of Covid-19 vaccines,'' describing the lawsuit as ''without merit.''  It said that it would deliver almost 50 million doses to the bloc by the end of April, and that it had ''fully complied with the advance purchase agreement with the European Commission and will strongly defend itself in court.''  Stefan de Keersmaecker, a spokesman on health issues for the European Commission, said that the bloc had begun legal action because it believed the purchase agreement had been breached.  ''The reason indeed being that the terms of the contract, or some terms of the contract, have not been respected,'' he said, ''and the company has not been in a position to come up with a reliable strategy to ensure the timely delivery of doses.''  Mr. de Keersmaecker said that all the 27 E.U. member countries supported the move.  The two parties had been engaged in an arbitration effort, but the European Union decided to move ahead with a legal case. The contract is under Belgian law, and legal proceedings would happen in Belgium.  The European Union's vaccine contract with AstraZeneca, a British-Swedish company, was the first it signed, in August last year.  Whereas Brussels was desperate for AstraZeneca doses earlier this year, it has since put itself in a stronger position: European officials have pivoted to Pfizer's vaccine, indicating that they would not seek further doses from AstraZeneca beyond those they had already purchased. The bloc is negotiating a contract with Pfizer for 1.8 billion doses over the next two years.  Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, told The new_york_times on Sunday that AstraZeneca had squandered the bloc's trust.  ''The noncommunication of AstraZeneca of the problems made it like pulling a chewing gum, because you never knew what was going on,'' she said. Ms. von der Leyen added that the delivery shortfalls were too steep to ignore.  ''At the moment, the company has a delay in delivering 200 million doses of vaccine by the end of the second quarter,'' she said. ''The number speaks for itself.''  AstraZeneca's vaccine is being widely used across Europe, though some countries have curbed its use in younger people because of the risk of very rare blood clots. The European Medicines Agency, the bloc's drug regulator, said this month that the shot's benefits still outweighed its risks, but that it should carry a warning.  The vaccine is not yet authorized for use in the United States. American officials have given a few million doses that were manufactured there to Canada and Mexico.  A delivery driver with two boxes of the AstraZeneca vaccine in Prague in February. The E.U. says the company is on track to deliver only 100 million of a promised 300 million doses by June. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARTIN DIVISEK/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004z "
55		"    Nick Springer, 35, Hard-Hitting Paralympic Champion  By Richard Sandomir  1,220 words 27 April 2021   10     A quadruple amputee, he was a relentless defender on the United States' wheelchair rugby team, which won a gold medal at the 2008 Paralympics in Beijing.  Nick Springer, who became a Paralympic gold medalist in wheelchair rugby at Beijing in 2008, only nine years after contracting meningococcal meningitis, which caused the partial amputations of his arms and legs, died on April 14 in Chandler, Ariz., a suburb of Phoenix. He was 35.  His father, Gary, said that Springer, who lived in Phoenix, died in a friend's pool after finishing a lap. A cause of death had not yet been determined, but he had been seeing a cardiologist for an arrhythmia.  Wheelchair rugby -- also known as ''Murderball,'' which was the title of a 2005 documentary about the sport -- suited Springer's love of rough-and-tumble action. He had played hockey from age 5 or 6, hoping to become a professional and play for the New York Rangers.  In 2000, a year after losing parts of his arms and his legs above the knees, he turned to sled hockey while still in rehabilitation. He later took up wheelchair rugby, an often violent sport that contains elements of traditional rugby, basketball and handball.  ''A lot of people look at me like I'm fragile,'' Springer told The new_york_times in 2003. ''Sports gives me a chance to get out there and bang myself up.''  After Springer tried wheelchair rugby for the first time in 2003, ''he rolled off the court with an ear-to-ear grin, saying, 'Dad, I think I can be really good at this,''' said Gary Springer. His father would drive Nick from their home in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., in Westchester County, to practices in Hackensack, N.J., and to tournaments, where he competed with a team from the Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association (now the United States Spinal Association).  He excelled quickly: He joined the development squad of USA Wheelchair Rugby, the sport's governing body, in the spring of 2005, and made the U.S. national team the next year, when it won the gold medal at the world championships. In 2008, the team won the Canada Cup and the gold medal over Australia at the Paralympics in Beijing.  ''He was a great defender -- probably for a long period of time the best defender in the world,'' said Scott Hogsett, a friend and a teammate of Springer's on the 2008 team. ''He's the main reason we won the gold; he defended one of the best players in the world'' -- the Australian wheelchair rugby star Ryley Batt -- ''and shut him down.''  But the victory in China came amid sadness. Springer's mother, Nancy (Ford) Springer, was dying of cancer while her husband and their daughter, Olivia, were at the Paralympics.  When his mother first learned she had cancer, in January 2008, Springer offered to stop playing wheelchair rugby and move home.  ''She looked me in the eye and said, 'It would crush me if you don't go to the Olympics,''' he said, recalling her conversation to The Journal News, a newspaper based in White Plains, N.Y., in 2008. ''And she said, 'The one thing you have to promise is that you won't let this keep you from winning the gold medal.'''  Ms. Springer was in a coma, surrounded by friends and family watching the gold medal game on a laptop and hearing the announcer refer to her son as ''Nick the Tank.'' She died the next day, before her son, husband and daughter got home.  The gold medal, Springer said, was how he would remember her.  ''It's my mother's medal,'' he told The Journal News.  Nicholas Bowen Springer was born on June 9, 1985, in Manhattan and grew up in Brooklyn and Croton-on-Hudson. His father is an entertainment publicist, and his mother taught deaf children and was one of several founders of the National Meningitis Association.  Springer had hockey on his mind in August 1999. He had just completed two weeks of goaltender camp near Toronto -- he was going to play the position on his high school's junior varsity team that fall -- and was attending sleepaway camp in western Massachusetts.  After a three-day, 30-mile hike, he began feeling flulike symptoms, which continued to worsen over the next 16 hours. Purple blotches appeared on his abdomen, indicating blood clots. All were symptoms of meningococcal meningitis, a bacterial infection that causes swelling of the protective membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord.  Up to one in five people who survive meningitis may suffer amputations, deafness, and brain and kidney damage; 10 to 15 percent die, even with rapid treatment, according to the National Meningitis Association.  Springer was sent to a hospital in Pittsfield, Mass., and then quickly airlifted to another in Springfield, where his organs began to fail and his blood pressure fell to almost zero. He was given a 10 percent chance of survival.  He was transferred to a hospital in Manhattan, where he underwent the amputations while remaining in a medically induced coma that would last eight weeks.  After awakening, according to the 2003 new_york_times article, he told his father: ''Dad, I don't think I have any fingers. I think I know about my legs, too.'' Gary Springer recalled: ''My wife and I looked at each other and said, 'This is our new normal.' Because Nick is alive. He's still Nick.''  Springer declined to wear prosthetics or use an electric wheelchair. And he played wheelchair rugby relentlessly.  ''At a very high level, it can be really violent, and that's what people like about it,'' his friend Scott Hogsett said. ''Who doesn't want to watch two people crash in wheelchairs as hard as you can?''  Springer was named the 2009 athlete of the year by the United States Quad Rugby Association, which oversees a league of local teams like the ones he played for in Sarasota, Fla., and in Phoenix, where Hogsett was a teammate. He was also on the 2010 world championship team and the 2012 Paralympic team, which won a bronze medal.  ''Nick was just ferocious,'' Joe Delagrave, a teammate in 2012, said. ''We met in 2009, and he got me playing at a high level. He was phenomenal at mentoring people and loving them.''  In addition to his father, Springer is survived by his sister, Olivia McCall, and his father's partner, Elizabeth Cier.  Springer, who graduated from Eckerd College in St. Petersburg in 2010 with a bachelor's degree in communications, had been an advocate for meningitis vaccine awareness. He began speaking at colleges and community organizations and to health professionals in 2005 on behalf of the meningitis association and Novartis, which made a vaccine. In 2015, he began speaking exclusively to health workers after Novartis sold most of its vaccine business to GlaxoSmithKline.  His father said: ''He talked about before he got sick, getting sick, and how his parents didn't know there was a vaccination that could have prevented it.''  Nick Springer at the 2012 Paralympics in London. Four years earlier, he won a gold medal with the U.S. wheelchair rugby team. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE EHRMANN/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00037 "
56		"    Guard Who Prosecutors Say Watched as a Man Hanged Himself in Jail Is Charged  By Jonah E. Bromwich and Jan Ransom  891 words 27 April 2021   24     Capt. Rebecca Hillman was charged with criminally negligent homicide in the death, which has added to criticism of New York City's jail system.  Ryan Wilson had been held at the Manhattan Detention complex for less than a month when he fell into a deep depression last November.  After an argument with another person at the jail, Mr. Wilson fashioned a noose out of a bedsheet and attached it to a light fixture. He told an correction officer that he would hang himself if he was not allowed out of his cell, according to court documents.  But Capt. Rebecca Hillman, who was supervising the area where Mr. Wilson was being held, did not appear to take his threat seriously.  When he tired of waiting for her and jumped off a stool with the sheet around his neck, Captain Hillman told others at the jail that he was ''playing,'' prosecutors said. When another officer asked if he could enter the cell to cut Mr. Wilson down, she said no, leaving him to hang from the light fixture for nearly 15 minutes.  On Monday, Captain Hillman, 38, was charged with criminally negligent homicide in Manhattan Criminal Court, and with filing a false report about the episode, which happened on Nov. 22. She pleaded not guilty. Her lawyer did not immediately respond to a request for comment.  Mr. Wilson, 29, had struggled with mental health problems for years but had never tried to kill himself before, his lawyer said. He was charged with robbery in October 2020 and sent to the Manhattan jail complex, often called the Tombs.  Mr. Wilson's death underscored pervasive problems in the city's jail system, including efforts by some guards to cover up misconduct. The pandemic has also exacerbated shortcomings in the mental health system behind bars. Rates of self-harm have risen in the jails as fear of Covid-19 and the slow pace of the courts have contributed to an environment of near-constant anxiety, incarcerated people and their lawyers have said.  ''We keep hearing Black lives matter but keep seeing Black lives don't matter,'' Mr. Wilson's lawyer, Benjamin Pinczewski, said in an interview. ''Ryan Wilson's life did not matter.''  Captain Hillman and the second officer, whom Mr. Pinczewski identified as Oscar Rojo, were both suspended shortly after Mr. Wilson's death was reported in the fall.  Mr. Wilson had spent seven years in prison for an attempted robbery and was released last June. His sister, Elayna Manson, said he received some help from a church in Brooklyn but grew impatient when he was unable to find work.  Mr. Wilson ended up in a shelter, a move that Ms. Manson said exacerbated his mental heath problems. She said she tried to encourage her brother, assuring him that his circumstances would improve and giving him money.  Mr. Wilson, who was on parole, was arrested on robbery charges in October, when he was trying to get money for food, his lawyer said. Being incarcerated again caused Mr. Wilson to go into a steep depression, Mr. Pinczewski said, adding that the Correction Department was aware of his mental health history and needs.  Patrick Ferraiuolo, president of the Correction Captains' Association, did not respond to a request for comment.  The Rev. Kevin McCall, speaking on behalf of Mr. Wilson's family after Captain Hillman appeared in court, said that the criminal charges were a ''step in the direction of justice'' but that she should also be fired.  ''We're not satisfied, because this correction officer, this captain who took an oath to protect the inmates and provide safety for the inmates is still working for the Correction Department,'' Mr. McCall said.  Correction Department officials said an internal investigation into the case was continuing. They declined to respond to specific questions about Captain Hillman and the allegations against her. She could face up to four years in prison if found guilty.  ''Your job was to make sure everyone was safe -- to protect the people,'' Ms. Manson said. ''I wish you would have done your job, and my brother would have still been here. What made her not intervene?''  After Mr. Wilson's death, prosecutors said, Captain Hillman provided falsified official documents about what happened. A new_york_times analysis of recently released data found that lying on officials records was common among correction officers who had been disciplined over a 20-month period, with more than half providing false or incomplete information.  Officer Rojo was not charged with a crime. He tried to help Mr. Wilson but was stopped by Captain Hillman, Mr. Pinczewski said.  Mr. Wilson's death was startlingly similar to an attempted suicide on Rikers Island in 2019. In that case, the detainee, Nicholas Feliciano, hanged himself in his cell with a piece of clothing.  Guards looked on for seven minutes before entering his cell. Mr. Feliciano survived. Five correction officers and a captain were suspended in that case, but no one has been charged.  Prosecutors say Rebecca Hillman, a correction officer at the Manhattan Detention Complex, stopped another officer from preventing a prisoner from hanging himself. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jefferson Siegel for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004n "
57		"    Those Blah Feelings Have a Common Name  By Adam Grant  1,610 words 27 April 2021   6     The neglected middle child of mental health can dull your motivation and focus -- and it may be the dominant emotion of 2021.  At first, I didn't recognize the symptoms that we all had in common. Friends mentioned that they were having trouble concentrating. Colleagues reported that even with vaccines on the horizon, they weren't excited about 2021. A family member was staying up late to watch ''National Treasure'' again even though she knows the movie by heart. And instead of bouncing out of bed at 6 a.m., I was lying there until 7, playing Words with Friends.  It wasn't burnout -- we still had energy. It wasn't depression -- we didn't feel hopeless. We just felt somewhat joyless and aimless. It turns out there's a name for that: languishing.  Languishing is a sense of stagnation and emptiness. It feels as if you're muddling through your days, looking at your life through a foggy windshield. And it might be the dominant emotion of 2021.  As scientists and physicians work to treat and cure the physical symptoms of long-haul Covid, many people are struggling with the emotional long-haul of the pandemic. It hit some of us unprepared as the intense fear and grief of last year faded.  In the early, uncertain days of the pandemic, it's likely that your brain's threat detection system -- called the amygdala -- was on high alert for fight-or-flight. As you learned that masks helped protect us -- but package-scrubbing didn't -- you probably developed routines that eased your sense of dread. But the pandemic has dragged on, and the acute state of anguish has given way to a chronic condition of languish.  In psychology, we think about mental health on a spectrum from depression to flourishing. Flourishing is the peak of well-being: You have a strong sense of meaning, mastery and mattering to others. Depression is the valley of ill-being: You feel despondent, drained and worthless.  Languishing is the neglected middle child of mental health. It's the void between depression and flourishing -- the absence of well-being. You don't have symptoms of mental illness, but you're not the picture of mental health either. You're not functioning at full capacity. Languishing dulls your motivation, disrupts your ability to focus, and triples the odds that you'll cut back on work. It appears to be more common than major depression -- and in some ways it may be a bigger risk factor for mental illness.  The term was coined by a sociologist named Corey Keyes, who was struck that many people who weren't depressed also weren't thriving. His research suggests that the people most likely to experience major depression and anxiety disorders in the next decade aren't the ones with those symptoms today. They're the people who are languishing right now. And new evidence from pandemic health care workers in Italy shows that those who were languishing in the spring of 2020 were three times more likely than their peers to be diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder.  Part of the danger is that when you're languishing, you might not notice the dulling of delight or the dwindling of drive. You don't catch yourself slipping slowly into solitude; you're indifferent to your indifference. When you can't see your own suffering, you don't seek help or even do much to help yourself.  Even if you're not languishing, you probably know people who are. Understanding it better can help you help them.  A name for what you're feeling  Psychologists find that one of the best strategies for managing emotions is to name them. Last spring, during the acute anguish of the pandemic, the most viral post in the history of Harvard Business Review was an article describing our collective discomfort as grief. Along with the loss of loved ones, we were mourning the loss of normalcy. ''Grief.'' It gave us a familiar vocabulary to understand what had felt like an unfamiliar experience. Although we hadn't faced a pandemic before, most of us had faced loss. It helped us crystallize lessons from our own past resilience -- and gain confidence in our ability to face present adversity.  We still have a lot to learn about what causes languishing and how to cure it, but naming it might be a first step. It could help to defog our vision, giving us a clearer window into what had been a blurry experience. It could remind us that we aren't alone: languishing is common and shared.  And it could give us a socially acceptable response to ''How are you?''  Instead of saying ''Great!'' or ''Fine,'' imagine if we answered, ''Honestly, I'm languishing.'' It would be a refreshing foil for toxic positivity -- that quintessentially American pressure to be upbeat at all times.  When you add languishing to your lexicon, you start to notice it all around you. It shows up when you feel let down by your short afternoon walk. It's in your kids' voices when you ask how online school went. It's in ''The Simpsons'' every time a character says, ''Meh.''  Last summer, the journalist Daphne K. Lee tweeted about a Chinese expression that translates to ''revenge bedtime procrastination.'' She described it as staying up late at night to reclaim the freedom we've missed during the day. I've started to wonder if it's not so much retaliation against a loss of control as an act of quiet defiance against languishing. It's a search for bliss in a bleak day, connection in a lonely week, or purpose in a perpetual pandemic.  An antidote to languishing  So what can we do about it? A concept called ''flow'' may be an antidote to languishing. Flow is that elusive state of absorption in a meaningful challenge or a momentary bond, where your sense of time, place and self melts away. During the early days of the pandemic, the best predictor of well-being wasn't optimism or mindfulness -- it was flow. People who became more immersed in their projects managed to avoid languishing and maintained their prepandemic happiness.  An early-morning word game catapults me into flow. A late-night Netflix binge sometimes does the trick too -- it transports you into a story where you feel attached to the characters and concerned for their welfare.  While finding new challenges, enjoyable experiences and meaningful work are all possible remedies to languishing, it's hard to find flow when you can't focus. This was a problem long before the pandemic, when people were habitually checking email 74 times a day and switching tasks every 10 minutes. In the past year, many of us also have been struggling with interruptions from kids around the house, colleagues around the world, and bosses around the clock. Meh.  Fragmented attention is an enemy of engagement and excellence. In a group of 100 people, only two or three will even be capable of driving and memorizing information at the same time without their performance suffering on one or both tasks. Computers may be made for parallel processing, but humans are better off serial processing.  Give yourself some uninterrupted time  That means we need to set boundaries. Years ago, a Fortune 500 software company in India tested a simple policy: no interruptions Tuesday, Thursday and Friday before noon. When engineers managed the boundary themselves, 47 percent had above-average productivity. But when the company set quiet time as official policy, 65 percent achieved above-average productivity. Getting more done wasn't just good for performance at work: We now know that the most important factor in daily joy and motivation is a sense of progress.  I don't think there's anything magical about Tuesday, Thursday and Friday before noon. The lesson of this simple idea is to treat uninterrupted blocks of time as treasures to guard. It clears out constant distractions and gives us the freedom to focus. We can find solace in experiences that capture our full attention.  Focus on a small goal  The pandemic was a big loss. To transcend languishing, try starting with small wins, like the tiny triumph of figuring out a whodunit or the rush of playing a seven-letter word. One of the clearest paths to flow is a just-manageable difficulty: a challenge that stretches your skills and heightens your resolve. That means carving out daily time to focus on a challenge that matters to you -- an interesting project, a worthwhile goal, a meaningful conversation. Sometimes it's a small step toward rediscovering some of the energy and enthusiasm that you've missed during all these months.  Languishing is not merely in our heads -- it's in our circumstances. You can't heal a sick culture with personal bandages. We still live in a world that normalizes physical health challenges but stigmatizes mental health challenges. As we head into a new post-pandemic reality, it's time to rethink our understanding of mental health and well-being. ''Not depressed'' doesn't mean you're not struggling. ''Not burned out'' doesn't mean you're fired up. By acknowledging that so many of us are languishing, we can start giving voice to quiet despair and lighting a path out of the void.  Adam Grant is an organizational psychologist at Wharton, the author of '' Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You Don't Know '' and the host of the TED podcast WorkLife .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Manshen Lo FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0002u "
58		"    Cuomo, in Rare Public Appearance, Says, 'I Didn't Do Anything Wrong'  By Jesse McKinley  965 words 27 April 2021   24     After months of holding virtual news conferences, Gov. Andrew Cuomo took reporters' questions in Syracuse, N.Y., and rejected accusations of harassment.  SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- In recent months, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has striven to convey a sense of normalcy during a period of profound turmoil, holding a series of tightly controlled events where he is often surrounded by aides or supporters, and seldom by reporters.  Since mid-December, Mr. Cuomo has not been in the same room with any reporter allowed to ask a question, citing concerns over the coronavirus, even when speaking in cavernous locales like the Javits Center or Belmont Park. He has taken questions every week, but it has been done remotely, with his staff choosing the reporters and controlling their microphones, sometimes preventing follow-ups.  Such strategies have been in greater use since late February, when a series of sexual harassment allegations engulfed Mr. Cuomo, prompting journalists' organizations to suggest that the governor is dodging the press.  On Monday, Mr. Cuomo broke the four-month-old streak with an appearance at the State Fairgrounds in Syracuse in front of about a dozen print and television reporters.  He promptly made news, flatly denying that he had ever sexually harassed anyone or had done ''anything wrong'' -- a subtle shift from previous remarks where he acknowledged making statements that might have made employees uncomfortable or been perceived as ''unwanted flirtation.''  Standing outside on a brisk, sunny day, Mr. Cuomo, 63, also addressed the ongoing investigation by the state attorney general, Letitia James, who has hired two outside lawyers to run the inquiry into the sexual harassment claims. He predicted her report would not find any wrongdoing.  ''The report can't say anything different,'' said Mr. Cuomo, a third-term Democrat, ''because I didn't do anything wrong.''  The sexual harassment investigation by Ms. James is just one of four known inquiries into Mr. Cuomo's personal behavior and professional conduct, including an impeachment investigation underway by the State Assembly, which also touches on allegations that the governor engaged in unsettling behavior toward women.  The governor's handling of nursing homes is also under examination by federal authorities, as is the possible misuse of state resources -- including state employees -- to work on his 2020 book, ''American Crisis: Leadership Lessons from the Covid-19 Pandemic.'' That investigation is also being overseen by Ms. James.  Mr. Cuomo's advisers have accused Ms. James, a fellow Democrat, of ''political self-interestâ,'' saying that she wants to run for governor, and have argued that any employees that worked on the book did so as volunteers. On Monday, however, Mr. Cuomo said his administration did not have any documentation showing that employees opted in to do such volunteer work.  ''I didn't have them sign a volunteer form if that's what you're asking,'' the governor said. ''The question is did they volunteer. And I'm saying yes, they volunteered.''  On the issue of nursing homes, too, Mr. Cuomo characterized such inquiries as politically motivated, citing a 2020 inquiry by the Trump Department of Justice. He did not address a probe by the Eastern District of New York that was initiated after President Biden was sworn in.  Even though most of the state's Democratic leaders called on Mr. Cuomo to resign in the wake of sexual misconduct -- including published reports accusing him of groping the breast of a much-younger female aide at the Executive Mansion -- he has refused to consider stepping down, a position he reiterated on Monday. Mr. Cuomo has previously said he has never ''touched anybody inappropriately.''  Polls have shown a continued erosion in support for Mr. Cuomo, who has said he wants to seek a fourth term next year. More than half of the registered voters who were polled would rather support a different candidate in 2022, according to a recent Siena College poll, even though a slim majority of residents in heavily Democratic New York still do not want him to immediately resign.  After a record $212 billion state budget was passed in early April, the governor had seemingly begun to find his political rhythm over the last week, appearing at an event alongside the Senate majority leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, who has called on him to resign. (Ms. Stewart-Cousins, a Westchester Democrat, has since reiterated that she wants the governor to resign.)  His public-facing strategy to control his news conferences has also included a steady dose of good news, such as new vaccination sites and loosening of virus-based restrictions.  On Monday, he continued that pattern, announcing a reopening of the State Fair in August -- a major economic force in upstate New York -- along with new rules to allow more spectators at sporting events and to increase capacity at venues like gyms and casinos.  Still, the bulk of the questions that Mr. Cuomo faced had to do with the spring's scandals rather than the summer's fair. In addition to denying all allegations against him, Mr. Cuomo also said he did not regret asking several young female aides to help him at the Executive Mansion, something he reframed as a commitment to hiring and promoting women in his administration.  Asked why various people have made allegations about his behavior in recent months, Mr. Cuomo suggested that their motives were myriad. ''People are venial, people want attention, people are angry, people are jealous,'' the governor said. ''Who knows why people spread rumors?''  Gov. Andrew Cuomo took questions on Monday from reporters in Syracuse, a rare break from a long string of virtual news conferences. (PHOTOGRAPH BY N. Scott Trimble/The Post-Standard, via Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004m "
59		"   ON SOCCER  Much Potential Rain on a Champions League Parade  By Rory Smith  1,370 words 27 April 2021   9     A history of Champions League success is part of the fabric at Real Madrid. No club has won it more often. But rivals keep driving up the price.  Real Madrid knows the route. The first stop will be at Almudena, the Spanish capital's cathedral. Then it is on to Puerta del Sol, in the heart of the city, before a reception at the Palace of Communications, where the local council sits. The formalities over, it is out on to Plaza de Cibeles, the fountain-cum-roundabout where Real Madrid always celebrates its triumphs.  The path is a well-worn one. ''Something of a routine,'' as Real Madrid's captain, Sergio Ramos, put it in 2018. The club has done it 13 times before; a substantial proportion of this current squad has done it four times since 2014.  It has done it so often that there are rules in place now. The players are no longer allowed to climb up the statue of Cybele, in a chariot drawn by lions, that stands at the center of the roundabout, after one of their over-exuberant forebears managed to break her arm. Instead, one will be allowed to place a scarf, delicately, around her neck. Real Madrid knows what it does, where it goes and how it behaves when it wins the Champions League.  There is no equivalent among the three teams who might yet deny Real Madrid a 14th crown this year. Manchester City has made it to the semifinals for only the second time in its history. Paris St.-Germain is here for only the third time. Chelsea, Real Madrid's opponent in the semifinals on Tuesday, has at least staged one victory parade, in 2012, but precedent is not quite the same as tradition. Chelsea would have to plot a map for another. Real Madrid can do the journey on autopilot.  This, then, is Real Madrid's stage. In one light, Coach Zinedine Zidane's team should be the last choice of the four remaining contenders to win European club soccer's biggest prize. Manchester City is free and clear at the summit of the Premier League, on the cusp of a third title in four years under the guiding hand of Pep Guardiola, the finest coach of his generation.  P.S.G. is propelled by not only the most expensive player of all time, but by Kylian Mbappé, the 22-year-old standard-bearer for soccer's next generation. Chelsea, revived under the German coach Thomas Tuchel, was reinforced by $250 million worth of talent last summer -- in the middle of a pandemic -- and now only concedes goals to teams managed by Sam Allardyce.  Real Madrid, on the other hand, is ravaged by injury. The player signed to sprinkle it with stardust, Eden Hazard, has barely featured in the two years since he joined. It failed to make the quarterfinals of this competition in 2019 and 2020, and came within a whisker of elimination in the group stage this time around.  Though it has not lost in any competition since January, its form has been stop and start. It followed a week in which it beat Barcelona and Liverpool with scoreless draws against Getafe and Real Betis. It has not even been able to do what Real Madrid does best: take advantage when its neighbor and rival, Atlético Madrid, loses its nerve.  But this is precisely the point when Real's history becomes an active force, rather than a scenic backdrop. Every single one of the Champions League trophies Real Madrid has acquired is on display in the club's museum. Twice, in recent years, it has had to expand the cabinet that holds them. This is not a problem any other team has. No other team feels quite so at home in this competition as Real Madrid.  It is strange, then, that only a week ago the club's president, Florentino Pérez, was busy trying to destroy it. The Super League project that he had spent three years developing -- and substantially more time conceiving -- might have been designed to ''save soccer,'' as he put it, but it could have done nothing but diminish the Champions League, the very trophy that plays such a central role in his club's self-identity.  He was, perhaps unsurprisingly, a little skittish when that point was made to him on one of the ill-judged and, significantly, solitary television appearances he made to defend the Super League.  Would Real Madrid's first Super League victory -- it was never questioned that Real Madrid would win the Super League, which is telling in itself -- be the club's first victory in that competition, or would it be its 14th European Cup? ''It might be the 15th,'' he answered. ''The 14th might arrive this season.''  Pérez had to be oblique, to swat the issue away. He cherishes winning the Champions League more than anyone else; in that trophy is, in his eyes, all the justification, all the answer, he ever needs. Even as he concocted the Super League, he would have known that to diminish the Champions League would, by proxy, serve to diminish Madrid's history, and his own.  Why he was prepared to do that can, in part, be gleaned from Real Madrid's balance sheet. The club is drowning in debt, behind on its salary bill -- another six-monthly installment of player salaries is due on June 30 -- and hamstrung by the costs of renovations to its stadium, the Bernabéu. There is a loan from Providence, an American hedge fund, to pay back. There are transfer fees outstanding. Real Madrid, put simply, needed the money.  But Pérez's rationale can be seen, too, in the identity of those teams hoping to beat Real Madrid to the Champions League trophy in Istanbul next month: Chelsea, underwritten by the private wealth of a Russian billionaire, Roman Abramovich; Manchester City, turned into a contender by its state backers in Abu Dhabi; Paris St.-Germain, the team that bought Neymar, financed by Qatar.  This is the new world order that Pérez has long feared, coming to pass. He knows that Real Madrid cannot compete for resources with these teams, no matter how often the Spanish government agrees to buy its training facility. It only has so many training facilities to sell, after all, and besides, in a world in which P.S.G. can pay $258 million for Neymar -- a fee paid, to some extent, with the specific aim of distorting the transfer market -- even that may not be enough.  It is hard to have too much sympathy. ''They have to control costs, not increase income,'' Javier Tebas, the president of La Liga, said last week. It was a sensible sentiment; if Real Madrid, like Barcelona, cannot pay the salaries or the transfer fees of Europe's rising powers, then they should cut their cloth accordingly.  Both clubs have frittered away hundreds of millions of euros on poor signings and inflated salaries; neither has the sort of coherent vision for their future that Manchester City, say, has carefully (and expensively) nurtured. Their crisis is in no small part of their own making. They could start again, trust in youth, run themselves more sustainably, and still enjoy the vast advantages conferred on them by their revenues.  But that, at Real Madrid, is easier said than done. It is not a club that will accept second best. Pérez knows that the continued popularity of his presidency rests on his ability to deliver ''a time of total glory,'' as he said in the aftermath of the club's 13th Champions League trophy, now three years past.  It is a club, instead, that knows by heart the route of its own valedictory tour, and that expects to make the journey every year. For years, it has felt as if the Champions League has belonged to Real Madrid, and yet here it is, slipping away, that familiar path becoming more and more arduous every year.  From left, Marcelo, Cybele and Sergio Ramos have been regulars at Real Madrid celebrations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAVIER LIZON/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004o "
60		"    Asian Man Remains in Critical Condition After Attack  By Michael Gold  885 words 27 April 2021   16     A Chinese man collecting bottles and cans was kicked in the head, part of a wave of assaults on Asian New Yorkers.  A 61-year-old Asian man who was assaulted in East Harlem on Friday night while pushing a grocery cart full of bottles and cans remained in critical but stable condition on Monday morning, the police said, another victim in a rising wave of attacks against Asians in New York City.  The man -- identified by local media outlets and elected officials as Yao Pan Ma, a Chinese immigrant -- was in a coma and on a ventilator after the attack, his wife, Baozhen Chen, told The New York Daily News.  Mr. Ma was at the corner of 125th Street and Third Avenue around 8 p.m. on Friday when a man dressed in black approached and hit him in the back, the police said. He collapsed onto the sidewalk.  A video released by the Police Department showed Mr. Ma lying unmoving as his attacker stomped on his head with white sneakers and kicked him multiple times in the face before running away. A bus driver who was passing by spotted Mr. Ma unconscious on the ground and called paramedics.  The city's Police Department, which was still searching for Mr. Ma's attacker on Monday, said that officers were investigating the assault as a possible hate crime.  The brutal assault came as reports of anti-Asian hate crimes have mounted in New York City and across the United States. The video, which spread across social media, brought a new wave of outrage and fear after a number of similar unprovoked attacks in recent months.  Many of the victims have been, like Mr. Ma, middle-aged New Yorkers who were alone on the streets or riding public transit. Last month, a Filipino-American woman walking to church was shoved to the ground and kicked. Footage of the attack went viral, and her assailant was charged with a hate crime.  Mayor Bill de Blasio called the attack on Mr. Ma ''outrageous'' and ''vicious.'' Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said the news had ''sickened'' him, calling the attack a ''bigoted act of violence'' and ordering the state police to assist with the investigation.  A police spokesman said surveillance camera footage suggested that Mr. Ma and his attacker had not interacted before the assault, leading detectives to believe Mr. Ma may have been targeted because he is Asian.  Reports of hate crimes targeting Asian-Americans have increased sharply across the country since the coronavirus pandemic began last year, as former President Donald J. Trump repeatedly used anti-Asian slurs to refer to the virus in an effort to link it to China.  Law enforcement officials nationwide have said attackers in some cases have used language falsely blaming Asian-Americans for spreading the virus.  The New York Police Department had received 66 reports of anti-Asian hate crimes this year as of last Sunday, the most recent day for which data was available, a spokeswoman said. That's more than five times the 12 incidents reported in the same period last year, and more than double the 28 recorded in all of 2020.  Police officials have said that more victims appeared to be reporting anti-Asian attacks than in the past. Community advocates have said that anti-Asian crimes have long been underreported because of language barriers and distrust of the police.  Experts testifying at a congressional hearing on anti-Asian discrimination last month said attacks targeting Asian-Americans had increased nearly 150 percent nationwide in the past year. Last week, the Senate passed a bill that would boost federal, state and local efforts to address such attacks.  The sharp rise has been particularly troubling in New York City, where people of Asian descent make up an estimated 14 percent of the population and which has been a longtime hub for Asian immigrants seeking to start new lives in the United States.  Mr. Ma and Ms. Chen were among them, she told The Daily News. The couple moved to New York City in 2019 from China's Guangdong province, leaving their two adult children behind.  A pastry chef in China, Mr. Ma was able to secure work at a Chinatown restaurant, Ms. Chen said. But he lost his job because of the pandemic's crushing effects on the economy and was not eligible for benefits, so he began collecting bottles and cans in a shopping cart as a way to bring in extra money.  ''He was just trying to help out the family,'' Ms. Chen told The Daily News, speaking in Cantonese. ''He had no bad intentions. He wouldn't cause trouble with other people in his neighborhood.''  Ms. Chen, who works as a home health care aide, said that Mr. Ma typically called her when he got home. She worried when she didn't hear from him on Friday night. When she called his phone, the police picked up.  ''I am very worried my husband will not make it,'' she told The New York Post.  The New York City police on Monday released an image from security footage of the man who they said attacked an Asian man. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA NEW YORK CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004k "
61		"   THE WORLD THROUGH A LENS  Dream of Childhood Splashes Into Reality In a Wild Landscape  By Colin Arisman  1,183 words 27 April 2021   13     My camera lens is pressed against the window of the small floatplane as it flies below a thick ceiling of clouds. The mist clings to the hillsides of a temperate rainforest that descend steeply to the rocky coastline of southeast Alaska.  The plane banks, and a tiny village comes into view. A scattering of houses are built on stilts on the water's edge. We circle and I see fishing boats tied up next to a large dock and a floating post office. The pilot throttles down and the pontoons skim across the glassy water inside the bay. We taxi to the public dock and I step out in front of the Point Baker general store.  Life along the Alaska coast is economically and culturally dependent on fishing. Each summer, millions of salmon -- after maturing in the ocean -- begin their journey back to the rivers in which they were spawned. Fishermen, along with whales, eagles and bears, share in the abundance.  For many in Alaska, salmon represent the wild, untamed landscape that makes their home so special.  Alaska has over 6,000 miles of coastline, more than four times that of any other state. There are a multitude of tiny fishing villages scattered along the edge of the Pacific Ocean, and many are only accessible by boat or plane. A number of these remote communities are Indigenous villages, where fishing has been a cornerstone of life for thousands of years.  I grew up fishing in the rivers and lakes of Vermont. My fascination with fish led me to study the history of early industrialization in New England and to gain an understanding of the toll that pollution, dams and overfishing had on East Coast waterways.  Atlantic salmon were once abundant in the Northeast, but their numbers have significantly decreased.  My hunger grew to witness a river teeming with wild salmon and a culture still interdependent with the bounty of the ocean. After college, I began traveling to Alaska annually to fly fish and pursue work as a photojournalist and documentary filmmaker.  On the dock in Point Baker, I load my bag onto the boat of my friend Joe Sebastian, a local fisherman. Joe fires up the diesel engine and we pull out of the harbor.  Joe, originally from the Midwest, moved to Point Baker in 1978 with the hopes of becoming an independent fisherman. When he arrived, he bought a commercial fishing permit for $20 and a small wooden skiff with a six-horsepower outboard motor for about $1,000.  ''The world was a lot less complicated back then,'' he says.  Joe began to fish, learning the ins and outs of salmon trolling from the old-timers who had called Alaska home since before it became a state. Trolling is a highly selective, low-impact method of fishing that involves dragging lines through the water and catching individual salmon that choose to bite the hooks. Not to be confused with trawling, which entails the use of giant drag nets, trolling is slower and lower volume than other methods of salmon fishing. It also maintains the highest quality of fish.  After a decade of fishing in Alaska, Joe and his wife, Joan, bought a 42-foot wooden fishing boat. They raised their children in Point Baker in the winter, and on their boat, the Alta E, in the summer.  ''Honestly, it wasn't always a great time -- seasickness, cramped quarters and clothes that smelled like fish,'' their daughter Elsa, now 30, says, reflecting on her childhood. Still, she became a fisherman anyway. ''Spending summers on the ocean becomes who you are,'' she says. ''I love the way that fishing makes me fundamentally part of an ecosystem.''  Alaska is home to five species of Pacific salmon. These fish are anadromous; they begin their lives in freshwater rivers and lakes and eventually make their way down rivers and into the ocean. Depending on the species, salmon may spend between about one and seven years in the ocean before beginning their journey home to the freshwater where they were born.  The ability of salmon to find their way home is one of nature's greatest miracles. Among other navigational aids, salmon can detect a single drop of water from its home stream mixed in 250 gallons of saltwater.  Once salmon enter their native watershed, some spawn immediately and others travel a thousand miles or more upriver. Soon after reproducing, they die and decompose.  Over the last 50 years, anadromous fish populations have declined significantly in California, Oregon and Washington. Alaska remains the United State's last great salmon stronghold.  Salmon are extremely sensitive to water quality and depend on cold, clean, oxygenated water to survive -- and Alaska is not immune to the same threats that have decimated salmon farther south. Logging and mining degrade some salmon habitat in Alaska, and climate change is compounding these impacts.  Many Alaskans are still concerned about the threat of the proposed Pebble Mine in Bristol Bay, the permit for which was denied by the Army Corps of Engineers in November. This region of southwestern Alaska supports the world's largest sockeye salmon run. Since the 1960s, more than half of the sockeye salmon returning to Bristol Bay have been caught each year, without an effect on their overall abundance, according to Daniel Schindler, a biologist at the University of Washington, in Seattle.  Lured by this legendary fishery, a few friends fly in to Dillingham to join me on a 10-day fly-fishing excursion deep in the backcountry, on the fringes of the Togiak National Wildlife Refuge. We load a floatplane with food, an inflatable raft, fishing rods and camping gear. We fly low over the tundra, crossing river after river full of salmon. From a few hundred feet above, we can see the red sockeye in dense schools in the slow eddies of the rivers.  We land on an alpine lake at the headwaters of the Goodnews River, inflate our raft and float downstream. We begin casting, and the action is nonstop.  For three friends who grew up in New England, the trip is the manifestation of a dream we've held our whole lives. As children we stared into deep pools of rivers in New England, imagining them pulsing with monster fish.  Here in Alaska, that dream is still alive.  Colin Arisman is a nonfiction filmmaker, photographer and writer. You can follow his work on Vimeo and Instagram .  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.  Each summer, salmon journey back to the rivers where they were spawned. People in fishing villages, like Point Baker, Alaska, above, share in the abundance, along with whales, eagles and bears.; A pink salmon, or humpy as they are known locally. Alaska is home to five species of Pacific salmon: the king or chinook, sockeye, coho, pink and chum. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY COLIN ARISMAN)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0002v "
62		"    Russia Halts Public Actions From Allies Of Navalny  By Andrew E. Kramer  1,001 words 27 April 2021   10     Prosecutors have temporarily muzzled the opposition leader's political groups, banning them from protests and posting on social media. But a court ruling may well make that permanent.  MOSCOW -- Prosecutors in President Vladimir V. Putin's government requested on Monday an immediate halt to all public activities by Aleksei A. Navalny's political groups, in one of the most sweeping legal moves against the Russian opposition in recent years.  The decision cripples the only remaining effective opposition to Mr. Putin's increasingly authoritarian rule and comes amid an intensifying campaign against Mr. Navalny, who survived an attempt on his life last year and is now serving a prison sentence on what he has called trumped-up charges.  Mr. Navalny's movement is the most prominent in Russia openly calling for Mr. Putin's removal through elections, and his supporters say the Kremlin is determined to crush that effort before it can yield fruit.  Prohibited from forming a political party, Mr. Navalny has instead worked through various nongovernmental organizations. These groups have persisted for years, despite unrelenting pressure from the Russian authorities, to push an anti-corruption drive that has frustrated and embarrassed Mr. Putin, often using social media to great effect.  The prosecutors' requests outlaw all the tools the groups have used to get their message out. It requests a ban on Navalny's nongovernmental organizations posting information on the internet, calling for public protests or taking part in political campaigns.  Prosecutors in Moscow requested the bans as preliminary rulings in a case that would declare the groups as ''extremist,'' akin under Russian law to a terrorist designation.  The court ordered an immediate halt to the activities of Mr. Navalny's nationwide network of political offices, organized in a group called Navalny's Headquarters. It will rule later on requests to squelch two of his other nongovernmental groups, the Fund for Fighting Corruption and the Fund for Defending Citizens' Rights.  In their filing, prosecutors said the activities were illegal because they were ''extremist'' in nature, although the evidence in the case has been classified.  It was unclear when the court would rule on the two other nongovernmental groups and the broader request to designate Mr. Navalny's movement as ''extremist,'' but judges in Russia rarely go against prosecutors.  ''This is just screaming, 'We fear your activity, we fear your protests, we fear smart voting,''' Ivan Zhdanov, a top aide to Mr. Navalny, wrote on Twitter, referring to a voting strategy in which the opposition coalesces around the single strongest candidate in a given race.  Until now, Mr. Navalny has still been able to get his word out through his various organizations.  Just days ago, he ended a hunger strike in jail after authorities relented amid an international outcry and allowed independent doctors to examine him. His personal doctors had feared that what they called ill treatment in jail and the hunger strike could kill Mr. Navalny unless he received proper medical care.  Though overshadowed by the assassination attempt on Mr. Navalny last year and his imprisonment and recent hunger strike, the legal onslaught against his movement also carries potentially far-reaching implications.  Mr. Putin's system of governance is sometimes called a ''soft authoritarian'' approach because it allows open opposition and more internet freedoms than in China. Political parties exist in Russia that are ostensibly in the opposition, but in fact they back Mr. Putin and most of his policies while criticizing officials lower down the pecking order, such as regional governors.  The prosecutors' request singled out Mr. Navalny's nongovernmental groups, saying they posed a risk to state security.  ''To propagandize their actions, to exchange information and attract new participants, members of the movement use multiple information resources on the internet,'' prosecutors wrote in their request. ''The sites distributed extremist materials, calls to carry out extremist activities and mass disturbances, and to participation in public activities not sanctioned by empowered government bodies.''  The prosecutor's request, which was published online by Mr. Navalny's aides, said the ban could be appealed but would otherwise be in effect until a court ruling in the extremism case. It asked that the nongovernmental groups be prohibited from gaining access to their bank accounts except to pay overhead costs and fines.  Prosecutors have harried Mr. Navalny and other opposition figures for years but usually under pretexts, such as violating rules on public gatherings, laws unrelated to their political activities or more recently regulations against gatherings to limit the spread of the coronavirus.  That approach provided a fig leaf of legal tolerance for political dissent, which is guaranteed under Russia's 1993 post-Soviet Constitution and seen as a touchstone for what separated contemporary Russia from the Soviet Union.  But the ruling on Monday against Navalny's Headquarters was distinct for plainly targeting political activity, including imposing a specific ban on taking part in political campaigns.  When they announced the case earlier this month, prosecutors argued that Mr. Navalny's movement was not, in fact, political. It was, they argued, a seditious organization disguised as a political movement. In a news release, prosecutors said that ''under the guise of liberal slogans these organizations are busy forming conditions for destabilizing the social and sociopolitical situation.''  But the evidence has been deemed a state secret and the case will be heard behind closed doors.  Valeria Vetoshkina, a lawyer for Mr. Navalny's organizations, said in a statement the prosecutors classified the evidence merely to avoid public scrutiny.  ''Designating the Fund for Fighting Corruption an extremist organization and all that follows from the ban on its activities, of course, curbs legal means for expressing opinion and spreading ideas and information,'' Ms. Vetoshkina said. ''Punishing people for their opinions at a minimum contradicts the Constitution.''  Police officers near the headquarters of Aleksei A. Navalny's Anti-Corruption Foundation in Moscow in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Yuri Kochetkov/EPA, via Shutterstock FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004h "
63		"    Disillusioned by Politics, But Moved to Take Part  By Claire Cain Miller  1,087 words 27 April 2021   15     Soon-to-be voters say they're disillusioned by what they've observed, but many are also motivated to political action.  For American teenagers, their political coming of age has been a tumultuous one. They've seen the boundary-breaking candidacies of women and people of color, and the norm-shattering presidency of Donald Trump. They've lived through racial justice protests, a pandemic, and attacks on American democracy.  Research shows that a voting generation is typically shaped for life by what happens politically in their teen years and early 20s. What have teenagers taken away from all this? We asked 604 of them, ages 13 to 17, from around the country, in a poll by Dynata for The new_york_times. A little more than half the teenagers surveyed were girls. And nearly half were Black, Hispanic, Native American or Asian-American. (We talked to more of them because Generation Z will be the first in which nearly half of the electorate is nonwhite.)  The survey revealed a generation of soon-to-be voters who felt disillusioned by government and politics, and already hardened along political lines -- something political scientists said was new for people this young. But it also revealed a significant share of teenagers who felt motivated to become involved themselves, whether out of inspiration or frustration.  ''Simultaneously, we have this caustic, scorched-earth politics of the Trump administration, particularly for people of color, and at the same time we see young people exercising power and influence and organizing and showing up in the marches and the election,'' said Valeria Sinclair-Chapman, a political scientist at Purdue. ''This is their political socialization, so we have to see how it plays out.''  The survey respondents were too young to vote, but they divided along similar partisan lines as adults, reflecting the divisive political atmosphere they've grown up absorbing. White teenagers were less likely than teenagers of color to support Mr. Biden. Biden supporters were more likely to say it was important to have women and other underrepresented groups serving in office. Eighty-seven percent of them said they hoped a woman would be elected president in their lifetime; 47 percent of Trump supporters hoped so.  About half of the teenagers strongly or slightly agreed that government had their interests in mind and could help meet their needs. But less than half of girls or respondents who were Black, Hispanic, Native or Asian-American agreed, and only one-third of Trump supporters did.  Their political attitudes differed significantly by gender and race. White boys were most likely to believe the government represented them. Minority girls were 21 percentage points less likely to agree that the government had their interests in mind. White boys were the only group of teenagers in which a majority could think of many people in leadership who shared their identity; just 25 percent of minority girls could.  These experiences were reflected in significant gaps in political ambition: White boys were 20 percentage points more likely to be interested in running for office than boys of color; white girls were eight points more likely than girls of color.  Yet despite being unconvinced that government was meeting their needs, the majority of the teenagers, and roughly equal shares of girls and boys, said they were interested in following and discussing what happens in politics and government. And various political events of the last four years were more likely to have inspired them to consider running for office someday than to have discouraged them.  The Trump presidency had the most polarizing effects on political ambition. It made one-third of teenagers of both genders less interested in running, with a larger effect on those of color. But it also made about half of survey respondents, and nearly three-quarters of Trump-supporting teenagers, more interested in running (the rest said it didn't influence their interest.)  By comparison, the 2020 election made about two-thirds of teenagers more interested in running, and 15 percent less interested, and the effect was similar for supporters of the Republican and Democratic candidates and for boys and girls.  Other research has also found that for some young people who were disappointed by the Trump presidency, it awakened their interest in political involvement, according to David Campbell and Christina Wolbrecht, both political scientists at Notre Dame.  ''What we found is that there was great disillusionment in democracy among adolescents, especially girls, especially those who think of themselves as Democrats,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''Then we found this upsurge in protest activity, so the disillusionment, rather than driving them out of politics, pushed them into political activity.''  Their research also suggests that the surge of women running has been encouraging to young people -- among liberals and some conservatives as well. In 2018, adolescents who lived in female congressional candidates' districts grew more positive about American democracy, whether or not the candidates won, the research shows.  ''There's no other way to explain their optimism than seeing these women run,'' Professor Campbell said. ''The effect is strongest among Democratic girls, but you find it among Democratic boys as well, and even Republican girls picked up on it. In fact, the only group that wasn't inspired was Republican boys.''  The teenage respondents' views of Kamala Harris, in an open-ended question about what it meant to them that she was vice president, ranged as widely as adults' views of her, and touched on similar themes of partisanship and identity.  Several called her a socialist. Others said they felt she was picked for her identity as a woman of color, rather than for her accomplishments, and one said she was ''not very likable.'' Another disapproved of her policies: ''Ultimately, Democrats will bankrupt the United States,'' that respondent said.  Still others called her an inspiration, especially those who did not see themselves in most political leaders: ''I am so happy, I am mixed-race and so is she,'' one wrote. ''She is totally inspiring to me and I love her.''  Another said, ''She is my inspiration to know that women can rise to the top in government.'' And a third wrote that her election sent this message: ''Politics are changing and more things are possible.''  A high school student in Atlanta registering to vote. What happens in politics when people are teenagers can shape their lifelong political views. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Christopher Aluka Berry/Reuters FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0002t "
64		"    After 2020 Count, New York Narrowly Loses Some Clout  By Shane Goldmacher  1,490 words 27 April 2021   18     New population figures released on Monday confirmed that after the latest census, New York would lose a congressional seat, but only by the narrowest of margins.  New York's congressional delegation will shrink by one seat after the 2022 election, the Census Bureau announced on Monday, but the state came excruciatingly close to snapping an eight-decade streak of declining representation in Washington: It was 89 residents short, to be precise.  The figure, revealed during the Census Bureau's announcement of which states would gain and lose seats in the House of Representatives after the decennial population survey, meant that if New York had counted 89 more people last year than the 20,215,751 who were tallied, it would have held on to the House seat. Instead, it went to Minnesota.  It was the narrowest margin by which a state lost a seat in the modern era, according to census data. The next closest call was in 1970, when Oregon fell short by 231 residents.  And it means that New York's congressional delegation will continue a steady decline in size that began in the 1940s, when the state boasted 45 members of the House. Now it will have only 26.  The tight margin led to some immediate recrimination about how New York had prepared for the count, which took place as the coronavirus surged in the state. Some progressive lawmakers and officials in New York City cast particular blame on Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.  ''The state was simply M.I.A.,'' said Julie Menin, who served as the census director for New York City. ''The governor and the state simply did not want to prioritize the census.''  Ms. Menin said she believed that the personal animus between Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio was a driving factor in the state's approach to the census, adding that she was ''100 percent'' sure that an additional 89 people would have been counted had there been greater state involvement. ''It's unconscionable,'' she said.  Peter Ajemian, a spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, said the state had devoted $30 million to the count. ''New York did better than the experts predicted, and our population count went up,'' he said. ''It's unbelievable that some politicians are willing to forget how many obstacles the Trump administration put in place -- during a pandemic no less -- in order to score cheap political points.''  Demographers and political analysts had expected New York to lose one or two seats, so the idea that the state had fallen just shy of losing none at all was at once a welcome result and a frustrating one.  ''New York was able to stave off the worst outcome -- losing two congressional seats and billions in federal revenue because of a census undercount of New Yorkers,'' said Murad Awawdeh, executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition.  Even as New York's overall footprint in Congress shrinks, Democratic leaders nationally believe redistricting in the state could potentially offset the Republican gains expected from partisan remapping efforts elsewhere in the country. The Republican Party has full power to draw favorable district lines in several large states, including Florida, Georgia and Texas.  California will remain the state with the largest congressional delegation, with 52 districts, losing one seat. Texas will pick up two seats for a total of 38. Florida and New York had been tied with 27 seats each, but Florida will gain a seat as New York sheds one, part of a broader trend of population shifts to the South and West in recent decades.  ''We were the Empire State of the country, and that is clearly not the case right now,'' said Nick Langworthy, the chairman of the New York Republican Party, blaming the tax policies of Democrats who dominate the state's government for the relative population decline. ''To have one less member of Congress, to have one less electoral vote, that makes our voice that much smaller.''  Census officials said that New York had a ''negative net domestic migration,'' but that its population grew overall because of immigration.  The announcement raised other questions about just how close New York came to retaining the House seat. The census was supposed to be a snapshot of the United States' population on a specific date: April 1, 2020. That happened to be right as the first wave of the coronavirus pandemic swept through New York. On March 31 alone, a new_york_times database showed, there were 417 deaths in the state.  New York's redistricting process -- the once-a-decade redrawing of state legislative and congressional seats that takes place after the census -- will formally begin with an independent commission, which has an equal number of Democrats and Republicans.  But many expect that commission to deadlock, and if it does, power to make the maps would eventually revert to the state Legislature in Albany, which is controlled by Democrats.  ''The reapportionment process is always difficult and fraught with complications,'' said State Senator Michael Gianaris, a Queens Democrat who is one of the leaders of the New York State Legislative Task Force on Reapportionment and Redistricting, which would make the maps if the independent commission failed to come to an agreement.  A decade ago, Republicans controlled the New York State Senate and had a hand in drawing state legislative maps; the final congressional map was drawn by a judge after state lawmakers were unable to come to an agreement.  Mr. Gianaris said the results from the 2010 redistricting process were ''grossly unfair and resulted in some of the most gerrymandered maps in the country.''  ''Mere fairness will likely bring about a better result for Democrats,'' Mr. Gianaris said.  New York is represented in the House by 19 Democrats and eight Republicans. The redrawn districts shown on some hypothetical maps by election forecasters could reduce the state's Republican representation to as few as three seats.  Even with a loss of one seat, New York is expected to retain one of the most powerful state delegations in Congress.  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York is the Senate majority leader. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who represents parts of the Bronx and Queens, is perhaps the most prominent progressive leader in America. And Representative Hakeem Jeffries of Brooklyn is viewed as one of the top contenders to succeed Speaker Nancy Pelosi as the next Democratic leader of the House.  The chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, is also from New York, and Mr. Maloney is expected to take a particular interest in how the state redraws its lines as he attempts to hold a historically narrow House majority. Democrats hold just a six-seat edge over Republicans.  As for where New York will reduce its representation, ''the assumption is the loss will be upstate somewhere,'' said Jack McEnany, a former state assemblyman who oversaw the most recent redistricting efforts.  There are several places upstate where Democrats could seek to eliminate a Republican-held seat.  Representative Tom Reed, a Republican who represents the Southern Tier, including Jamestown and Corning, recently announced that he would not seek re-election in 2022 after he was accused of groping a former lobbyist. His district could be combined with that of neighboring Representative Chris Jacobs, who represents the region outside Buffalo and who only took office last year.  Democrats could also combine the seats held by Representative Elise Stefanik, who represents much of the Adirondacks and is a top Republican fund-raiser now considering a run for governor, and Representative Claudia Tenney, who was narrowly re-elected to Congress last year after losing her seat in 2018. Ms. Tenney's Central New York district reaches from the Pennsylvania border to Lake Ontario.  A top Democratic target is Representative John Katko, a Republican who represents Syracuse and who managed to hold onto his seat even though Democrats have carried the district in recent presidential elections. Democratic mapmakers would almost surely tip the district to be more favorable to the party.  Another first-term Republican, Representative Nicole Malliotakis, represents Staten Island and a slice of the more conservative parts of South Brooklyn. But Democrats could add more overwhelmingly Democratic parts of Brooklyn to her seat, making it more competitive.  The district of Representative Lee Zeldin, a Republican who represents eastern Long Island, could be similarly redrawn to be more Democratic. Mr. Zeldin is raising money to run for governor in 2022.  ''They're going to try to gut these districts across the state,'' said Mr. Langworthy, the G.O.P. chairman, who predicted that Republicans would wind up spending heavily on legal fees battling Democratic plans in the courts. ''Mapmakers can be very vicious.''  Annie Correal contributed reporting.  New York's congressional team, with Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Chuck Schumer, will soon be smaller. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN McDERMID/REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004l "
65		"    Blue Origin Objects to Pick Of SpaceX for Moon Lander  By Kenneth Chang  1,565 words 27 April 2021   1     The space agency picked Elon Musk's company over two other bidders to take its astronauts back to the lunar surface.  Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk, two of the richest men in the world, both with dreams of leading humanity out into the solar system, are fighting over the moon.  On Monday, Blue Origin, the rocket company founded by Mr. Bezos, who will step down as Amazon's chief executive later this year, filed a 50-page protest with the federal Government Accountability Office, challenging a $2.9 billion contract to SpaceX from NASA to build a lander for American astronauts to return to the moon.  NASA announced this month that Mr. Musk's SpaceX was the sole winner in the competition, beating Blue Origin and a third company, Dynetics of Huntsville, Ala., a defense contractor.  Dynetics also filed a protest with the G.A.O. on Monday. The company did not reply to questions about its response. NASA acknowledged it had been notified of the protests. ''NASA cannot provide further comment due to pending litigation,'' the agency said in a statement emailed by a spokeswoman.  The dispute highlights that whatever the outsize ambitions of Mr. Musk and Mr. Bezos for the future, the present fortunes of their space companies and the ability to generate the profits needed to pay for their grandiose dreams depend on mundane business concerns like jousting for government contracts.  Bob Smith, chief executive of Blue Origin, said NASA's decision was based on flawed evaluations of the bids -- misjudging advantages of Blue Origin's proposal and downplaying technical challenges in SpaceX's. He also said NASA had placed a bigger emphasis on bottom-line cost than it said it would.  ''It's really atypical for NASA to make these kinds of errors,'' Mr. Smith said in an interview. ''They're generally quite good at acquisition, especially its flagship missions like returning America to the surface of the moon. We felt that these errors needed to be addressed and remedied.''  He added that in any case, the space agency should have stuck with a desire it had stated many times, of wanting to hand out awards to two companies.  SpaceX did not reply to a request for comment, but in a tweet directed at a Times reporter, Mr. Musk made a remark that played off the fact that Blue Origin has not yet achieved orbit with any of its rockets.  A year ago, NASA selected three lunar lander designs, by SpaceX, Blue Origin and Dynetics, for further study. NASA would then decide which designs it would finance to be built for lunar landings.  The Blue Origin proposal was a collaboration known as the National Team with three more traditional and experienced aerospace companies -- Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman and Draper. The lander they proposed looked somewhat like a bigger version of the one used for NASA's Apollo moon landings of the 1960s and 1970s.  SpaceX, by contrast, proposed adapting a giant rocket called Starship that it is developing for trips to Mars. SpaceX has been testing Starship prototypes at its site in South Texas, often with explosive results.  During previous trips to the moon, NASA was in charge of designs and operations, an approach that triumphantly beat the Soviet Union to the moon. But it was expensive, and when interest in the moon waned, the technology had little value to the private sector.  In recent years, NASA has turned to private companies to design and operate spacecraft as a way to reduce the costs of space travel and spur commercial enterprise off Earth. That has proved successful for missions to send cargo, and now astronauts, to the International Space Station.  SpaceX, in particular, has thrived in this new entrepreneurial approach to spaceflight. Its Falcon 9 rocket, used for the space station missions, is now a workhorse for launching commercial satellites. And its Crew Dragon capsule, which carried a third load of astronauts for NASA to the space station on Friday, will also be used for rides paid for by wealthy space tourists.  Blue Origin lags behind SpaceX's accomplishments. Its small, successfully tested New Shepard spacecraft is meant only for short, suborbital jaunts. A larger New Glenn rocket currently under development will compete with SpaceX and other rocket companies for sending satellites to orbit, but it will not make its maiden flight until at least 2022, two years later than originally announced.  Blue Origin's partners have decades of space experience, however.  NASA announced the lunar lander competition in 2018, and officials had repeatedly said they wanted to choose more than one company to ensure competition to spur innovation and redundancy. Last September, Jim Bridenstine, then the NASA administrator, testified that he would worry if NASA chose only one lander design.  ''When you eliminate the competition,'' he told a Senate subcommittee, ''you end up with programs that inevitably get dragged out, and you end up with cost overruns and schedule delays.''  However, for the current fiscal year, Congress provided only $850 million -- a quarter of what Mr. Bridenstine and NASA were requesting for the development of lunar landers.  When NASA officials announced SpaceX as the single winner, they suggested that limited budgets influenced the decision. Kathy Lueders, NASA's associate administrator for human exploration and operations, said selecting one company to build the first moon lander was the ''best strategy'' at the current time.  In its rules for the competition, NASA did not promise it would choose two companies or even any at all. Instead, according to the document, the agency said it was planning to select up to two companies.  Ms. Lueders said a follow-up competition to build subsequent landers would be open to Blue Origin, Dynetics and other companies.  Mr. Smith said Blue Origin would put in bids on a future competition. But he added, ''The idea that we're going to be able to restore competition with something that right now is completely undefined and completely unfunded doesn't make a lot of sense to us.''  When Bill Nelson, a former senator from Florida whom President Biden has nominated to be the next administrator for NASA, testified at a confirmation hearing last week, Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington and chairwoman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, asked him to commit to providing Congress with a plan for how NASA would ensure commercial competition in the moon lander program.  ''I do,'' Mr. Nelson said. ''Competition is always good.''  Mr. Smith said that with similar programs in the past, like the space station missions, NASA had hired more than one company even though it lacked certainty on future budgets.  The Blue Origin-led bid, at $6.0 billion, was more than double the price of SpaceX's. But Mr. Smith said NASA had gone back to SpaceX and negotiated the price of its proposal, even though it did not have similar discussions with the other two teams.  ''We didn't get a chance to revise and that's fundamentally unfair,'' Mr. Smith said.  Less than $9 billion would have paid for two landers, and that is comparable to the $8.3 billion cost of the commercial crew program that now provides transportation to the space station, the protest argued.  ''NASA is getting some great, great value from these proposals,'' Mr. Smith said.  NASA's evaluations of the bids gave ratings of ''acceptable'' on the technical aspects of Blue Origin's and SpaceX's proposals. Dynetics's rating was lower, at ''marginal.'' SpaceX's management was regarded as ''outstanding,'' while Blue Origin and its partners were judged, ''very good,'' as was Dynetics.  Mr. Smith said NASA misjudged aspects of its proposal, like the communications system and redundancy in guidance and navigation, as weaknesses. He also said it downplayed the risks in SpaceX's design like the need to refuel Starship in orbit, which has never been tried before.  The NASA evaluators ''largely dismissed the difficulty in the number of launches and rendezvous required in SpaceX's proposed solution,'' Mr. Smith said. ''The risk of SpaceX development is high.''  The Government Accountability Office has 100 days to make a decision on the protest.  This is not the first time that Blue Origin and SpaceX have battled over a NASA contract. In 2013, NASA chose SpaceX to take over Pad 39A at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had been used for Saturn 5 launches during Apollo and then launches of the space shuttles.  Blue Origin argued that its proposal, which would allow the launchpad to be used by multiple companies, should have been favored. But the G.A.O. said NASA had not expressed a preference for multiple companies using 39A and denied the protest. SpaceX now uses the launchpad for missions to the space station, and that is where the Starship trips to the moon would likely start from.  Jeff Bezos, founder of Blue Origin and chief executive of Amazon, in 2019. The SpaceX owner and Tesla chief executive Elon Musk, left. Mr. Musk's SpaceX was the sole winner in the competition to build a lander for American astronauts to return to the moon, beating Blue Origin and a third company, Dynetics of Huntsville, Ala. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOM BRENNER FOR THE new_york_times; HANNIBAL HANSCHKE/REUTERS) (B6)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004g "
66		"    'Back to Being Vladdy': How a Trainer And a Grandmother Revived Guerrero  By James Wagner  1,750 words 27 April 2021   7     The Blue Jays star sought help from a trainer -- and his grandmother -- to reimagine his body. He's down 42 pounds and his O.P.S. is up 244 points.  ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. -- The 2020 season wasn't over yet when Vladimir Guerrero Jr. realized what he needed to do.  He was, by his own admission, overweight. And the effects on the field were apparent: The Toronto Blue Jays moved him across the diamond, from his longtime position of third base to first. He had a hard time scoring from first on a hit in the gap. He struggled to reach low pitches while hitting. He grew tired after fielding 20 ground balls in practice.  So in late September, a few weeks before his team appeared in the playoffs, Guerrero sent a text message to someone he had never met, a private trainer named Junior Rodriguez, and asked to work with him in the off-season. That was the beginning of his journey -- with assists from people like his grandmother and Rodriguez -- to bounce back from a season not befitting a player of his talent.  ''One day, I woke up from bed, looked in the mirror and said, 'That's it,''' Guerrero, 22, said in a recent video call with reporters.  Between the playoffs in October and spring training in February, Guerrero shed 42 pounds from his 6-foot-2 frame, dropping to roughly 245 pounds. He is now gliding around the bases, doing the splits to vacuum up low throws at first, feeling spry and performing like one of the best hitters in baseball. Entering Monday, he was hitting .338 with more walks (16) than strikeouts (13), and had reached base an M.L.B.-best 43 times.  He is still eating his grandma's home cooking -- who could say no? -- but in smaller portions and with healthier options mixed in, and fewer are late-night meals.  ''He looks stronger, and he's lighter on his feet running and moving around,'' Guerrero's grandmother Altagracia Alvino said in Spanish in a recent phone interview. She added later, ''And what pleases me is that he's continued with his diet.''  Alvino would know best. She helped raise her grandson. And much as she did with her son, the Hall of Famer Vladimir Guerrero Sr., Alvino has lived with Vladimir Jr. and cooked Dominican food for him -- and for his teammates and opponents -- at every stage of his professional career.  Alvino has continued to live with her grandson this season. The 10-11 Blue Jays are using their spring training facility in Dunedin, Fla., as their regular-season home with the United States-Canada border closed for nonessential travel because of the coronavirus pandemic. The Guerreros own a home nearby in Tampa. (And unlike last year, should the Blue Jays relocate to their Class AAA affiliate in Buffalo this summer, Alvino said she planned to accompany Guerrero.)  Since Guerrero was a child, Alvino said, he has had the same body type. With preternatural skills that belied his age, he shot through the minor leagues and was the top prospect in baseball by 19. He reached the majors with much fanfare in 2019 and dazzled fans with his prodigious power during that year's Home Run Derby.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Over the past few years, though, Guerrero's weight grew. The Blue Jays had encouraged and worked with him to lose weight -- and he did in spurts. But in baseball's four-month pause last year because of the pandemic, he grew heavier -- for which he has said he apologized to his teammates.  ''For the last couple years, they knew I was coming here out of shape,'' Guerrero told reporters in February. ''I didn't prepare myself very well.''  In the abbreviated 60-game 2020 season, the Blue Jays moved Guerrero to the less demanding position of first base, and often out of the infield entirely, at designated hitter. He posted decent numbers -- a .262 batting average, nine home runs, a .791 on-base plus slugging percentage -- and helped guide the Blue Jays to their first playoff appearance in four years. But he and his team knew he was capable of so much more.  ''Deep down inside, he knew he had a bad year,'' Rodriguez said in Spanish in a phone interview. ''Not a really bad year, but at a physical level of performance, he was tired of being underestimated and feeling bad.''  At first, Alvino wasn't quite sure why Guerrero's weight increased last year. Eating her cooking -- she always removes excess fat from any meat she cooks, and sparingly uses oil -- Alvino said Guerrero lost some weight. But he then hit a plateau. She said the Blue Jays even asked her if anything had changed, and she insisted nothing had.  Later, though, she said, she poked around and discovered two possible culprits: light beers in the fridge next to the pool table at home, where Guerrero hung out with family and friends, and late-night snacking after she had fed him dinner.  ''I told him, 'My love, what I'm doing with my hands, you're destroying with your feet,''' Alvino said, repeating a common saying in Spanish.  So in September, Guerrero connected with Rodriguez, a personal trainer who has worked with other major leaguers like Ketel Marte, Ramon Laureano and Santiago Espinal, one of Guerrero's teammates.  Soon after Guerrero returned to the Dominican Republic following the Blue Jays' playoff exit, Rodriguez swung by the Guerreros' home to meet his new client for the first time. Rodriguez felt what would make the biggest difference was getting Guerrero to buy into lifestyle changes, so he was blunt.  ''I lowered his morale a little, but I was being sincere with him,'' Rodriguez said. ''I told him: 'You should be embarrassed that fans are underestimating you and talking bad about you, and you are one of the best prospects in the big leagues. Let's commit to this; I'll commit to you and you to me. I don't want this just for 2021, but forever. You're going to sleep like an athlete, you're going to eat like an athlete, you're going to train like an athlete.'''  And to Guerrero's credit, he did. For 90 minutes a session, four times a week in the winter, at the gym in Guerrero's house, Rodriguez trained Guerrero. He guided him through stages of conditioning, stretching, weight lifting and jumping exercises, focusing on improving any physical limitations. For example: Rodriguez said the lack of range of motion in Guerrero's torso dampened his power.  ''It's been a change of 180 degrees,'' Rodriguez said. ''This is a very different Vladimir.''  Away from the gym, Guerrero became more disciplined -- and the people around him helped. He increased his water intake. He stopped snacking after dinner. No more alcohol, fried food or sugar. He slashed his portion sizes, something Alvino said she had to get used to. She said a longtime family friend who also cooks has also kept an eye on the portions.  Alvino said she made Guerrero a cucumber-green apple-celery juice before the morning workouts and a papaya-oatmeal-cinnamon shake in the evenings. Lunch was the biggest meal of the day. Although Guerrero never ate a lot of rice, Alvino said, she started using a smaller spoon to serve him. He still got a normal amount of her stewed beans, his favorite, and meat or fish.  ''If he finishes fast, I say, 'Are you still hungry?''' she said. ''He says, 'No, abuela, I'm OK.'''  Guerrero still takes Alvino's traditional Dominican meals to the stadium to share. If he is hungry after night games, she makes him a small meal of grilled chicken or fish and vegetables. (And if she makes mangú, a dish of mashed boiled plantains, she said, she uses water and milk but not butter.)  Guerrero said in a recent video call with reporters that his body felt ''really different'' now and that he was proud of his off-season work. He said he planned to stick with the current regimen for the rest of his career. At the plate, he said, he felt better than at the height of his minor league career (he once hit .381 in a season). And even though he had originally hoped to return to third base, he said he was happy playing wherever the Blue Jays needed him.  ''I can do a lot of things I couldn't do before and, thank God, I feel very comfortable at the weight I'm at,'' he said.  Blue Jays Manager Charlie Montoyo said a fitter Guerrero had shown improvement in every aspect of his play on the field. Guerrero is hitting the ball even harder than usual this year, trailing only a handful of stars like Ronald Acuña Jr. of Atlanta and Giancarlo Stanton of the Yankees in that category.  ''He's back to being Vladdy, smiling in the dugout, having fun,'' said shortstop Bo Bichette, who has played alongside Guerrero since they were teenagers and believed his friend had the ability to be the best hitter in baseball. ''I haven't seen him get out and smile about his outs since Double-A, and he's been doing that a lot because he knows he's going to get them at some point.''  The baseball season, though, is arduously long and tests everyone. Rodriguez said he continually sends Guerrero reminders to stay on top of his routine. Montoyo wasn't planning on doing the same.  ''He's on a mission, and he doesn't need any help right now,'' he said of Guerrero. ''He knows what he needs to do and he's doing it.''  In the off-season, Vladimir Guerrero Jr. sought out the trainer Junior Rodriguez, top right, for a workout regimen that, combined with the cooking of Guerrero's grandmother Altagracia Alvina, above right, paid off. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JUNIOR MOSQUEA; TARA WALTON FOR THE new_york_times); BEFORE: Guerrero last season was moved from third base and had a hard time running the bases and hitting low pitches. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE EHRMANN/GETTY IMAGES); AFTER: Guerrero, who weighs 245 pounds, 42 less than in 2020, is hitting .338, feeling spry and gliding around the bases. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JONATHAN DYER/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004e "
67		"   PAUL KRUGMAN  Republicans Manufacture Some Red Meat  By Paul Krugman  982 words 27 April 2021   22     On Friday Larry Kudlow, who was Donald Trump's top economic adviser, told Fox News viewers that Joe Biden's climate plans would force Americans to stop eating meat. On July 4, he declared, you'd have to ''throw back a plant-based beer with your grilled brussels sprouts.''  Kudlow's remarks raise several questions. What, exactly, does he think beer is made from? Also, doesn't he know that grilled brussels sprouts are, in fact, delicious?  More important, why would anyone believe this assertion about Biden's plans, or expect anyone else to believe it? Why were Kudlow's claims echoed by many Republicans, from Donald Trump Jr., to members of Congress, to the governor of Texas?  To answer this question, it helps to think about Bernie Madoff, the infamous fraudster who died April 14. Seriously.  About Biden and burgers: The administration has, in fact, said nothing at all about changing America's diet. Furthermore, anything along those lines would be very much at odds with Biden's whole approach to climate change, which is to rely much more on carrots than on sticks, to provide positive incentives to invest in low-emission technologies rather than discouraging emissions with taxes or regulations.  Whether that approach will prove sufficient is debatable, but it is the approach the administration is taking, and telling people to stop eating meat would be completely out of character.  So where is this coming from? Kudlow took his cues from a sleazy article in The Daily Mail, a right-wing British tabloid. The article didn't actually assert that Biden is proposing to restrict meat consumption; instead, it offered a series of speculations about what might happen. Among other things it took the most extreme scenario from a University of Michigan study of how reduced meat consumption could affect greenhouse gas emissions -- a study released in January 2020 that had nothing whatsoever to do with the Biden plans. The Daily Mail also used a deceptive graphic to make it seem as if this was an actual administration proposal.  American right-wing pundits and politicians then ran with it. Did they actually believe the nonsense they were spouting? Well, Kudlow's apparent belief that beer is made with meat is arguably a point in his favor, an indication that he's genuinely clueless rather than merely cynical.  What's clear, however, is that neither Kudlow nor other Republicans touting an imaginary war on meat saw any need to check out their story, felt any concern that their audience -- Fox News viewers, Republican voters -- would find the claim that Joe Biden is coming for their red meat implausible.  Why not? That's where Bernie Madoff comes in.  The revelations about Madoff's immense Ponzi scheme and how he pulled it off introduced many of us to the concept of affinity fraud: scams that prey upon people by exploiting a sense of shared identity. Madoff defrauded wealthy Jews by convincing them that he was just like them.  A similar approach has long been an essential part of the Republican political strategy. As the party's economic policies have become ever more elitist, ever more tilted toward the interests of the wealthy, it has sought to cover its tracks by running candidates who seem like regular guys you'd like to have a (meat-based?) beer with.  The flip side of this strategy is a continual attempt by the G.O.P. to convince voters that Democrats, who represent a much more diverse set of voters than Republicans, aren't people like them; call it disaffinity fraud.  The goal is to portray Democrats as woke feminist vegetarians who don't share the values of Real Americans. Hence the right's obsessive focus on ''cancel culture'' and Democratic women of color, and the continual assertions that the white male senior citizen who leads the party is somehow a passive puppet.  Right-wing media are pushing this narrative nonstop. According to a Morning Consult poll last month, more Republicans said they'd heard ''a lot'' about the move to withdraw some Dr. Seuss books than said the same about Biden's huge Covid-19 relief bill.  It doesn't matter that Joe Biden isn't actually trying to ban hamburgers or -- to take another false claim right-wing pundits and politicians keep repeating -- that he hasn't ''taken down'' the border with Mexico. Republicans have pretty much given up even trying to make a case against Biden's actual policies, let alone proposing serious policies themselves.  Instead, it's all smears. Democrats, declared Kudlow, are ''ideological zealots who don't care one whit about America's well-being.'' That's pretty rich coming from a man famed for his unwavering commitment to the doctrine that cutting taxes on the wealthy solves all problems, no matter how often his predictions fail.  But never mind; the point is that Kudlow and others consider it OK to throw out wild claims about what Democrats are up to, because those are the kinds of things woke liberals would do, aren't they?  Will the public go along? The Biden administration thinks not, betting it can overcome the power of affinity fraud with policies that offer real benefits to working Americans. Unfortunately, there's no guarantee that this strategy will work.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  Larry Kudlow, who was Donald Trump's top economic adviser, apparently believes that beer is made with meat. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mark Peterson for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004c "
68		"    Amputee's Olympic Bid at Risk Over Height of His Running Blades  By Matthew Futterman  1,432 words 27 April 2021   9     Blake Leeper qualified for the world championships in track and field in 2019, but officials maintain his running blades make him too tall.  Blake Leeper, one of the world's fastest double-amputee athletes, will have to race on a significantly smaller set of running blades if he wants to compete for a spot on the United States Olympic team, World Athletics ruled Monday.  Leeper, who finished fifth in the 400 meters at the United States track and field championships in 2019, was in contention to compete on a relay at the World Athletics Championships that year, but the sport's world governing body ruled that the blades he used made him ''unnaturally tall.''  Leeper was born with both legs missing below the knee and at age 4 underwent amputative surgery to allow an optimal fit for prosthetics. He won two medals at the London Paralympics in 2012 but then decided to run against non-disabled athletes as well.  He used the same size blades in competition for five years before they were outlawed, and then switched to a set that made him about two inches shorter in hopes of gaining entry into the Olympic trials in June. He has said a significantly smaller set of blades would essentially force him to relearn how to run.  In the decision on Monday, a special expert panel for World Athletics, the sport's governing body, concluded that even the blades that made him two inches shorter would give him an unfair advantage over non-disabled runners.  ''The reports submitted satisfied the Panel that there is a direct relationship between leg length and running speed and that therefore the height of Mr. Leeper's running specific prostheses result in him running faster in the 400-meter event than would otherwise be the case,'' World Athletics said in a statement released Monday.  The decision means that Leeper's last hope for competing in the Olympics rests with a federal court in Switzerland.  In October, the Court of Arbitration for Sport, the world's top sports court, ruled that standards set by the International Paralympic Committee supported World Athletics' argument that Leeper's running blades made him taller than he would have been had he been born with fully functional legs.  Leeper has appealed that ruling to the Swiss Supreme Court, and he said he would appeal Monday's as well. He argued that in setting standards for the probable height of double-amputees who compete in track and field, officials had failed to conduct a sufficiently broad study, resulting in an act of discrimination against Leeper.  In setting the standards, athletics organizations have cited research that involved only Caucasian and Asian athletes. Leeper is Black. In Leeper's appeal, lawyers cited studies that suggest people of African descent can have longer legs than people who have different genealogy. The World Athletics panel denied that its decision was in any way discriminatory and questioned the data cited by the scientists Leeper consulted.  ''It's not right that World Athletics continues to discriminate against disabled Black athletes, and that the Panel they appointed has again sanctioned this discriminatory treatment,'' Leeper said in a statement Monday. ''Basing this decision on standards and studies that completely excluded Black athletes goes against common sense and has no scientific basis, as my experts' submissions to World Athletics made clear. But despite this setback, I will appeal so I can continue to fight for athletes around the world who are discriminated against -- whether on the basis of race, disability, or both.''  Previously, Leeper and other disabled athletes have had to prove that whatever equipment they used did not provide an advantage, a huge challenge since proving a negative is difficult in nearly every realm.  World Athletics has struggled in recent years to balance inclusion with what it sees as fairness in competition, but critics argue that its rules discriminate against people who are biological outliers.  For Leeper and, before him, Oscar Pistorius of South Africa, who in 2012 became the first double amputee to run in the Olympics, World Athletics focused on whether the equipment they used to run gave them an advantage over non-disabled runners. For Caster Semenya of South Africa and other female athletes born with elevated testosterone levels, the organization battled for years to prohibit them from competing in middle-distance track and field events unless they took medication to alter their hormones.  ''They have an archaic view of people, and they don't like differences,'' Jeffrey Kessler, a lawyer who has represented Leeper, Pistorius and Semenya, said of World Athletics during a recent interview. ''We are people. None of us is perfect. We are all on a spectrum.''  Like all high-performance prosthetics, Leeper's running blades and the mechanism that attaches them to his legs were tailored specifically for him at a height that allows his body to move in the most efficient way. Experts say it's impossible to determine whether the height at which Leeper is most comfortable running is suggestive of how tall he would have been had he been born with fully functioning legs. Under the latest height standards, his current blades would not be allowed in Paralympic races, either.  In filings with the Swiss court, Ross Wenzel, a lawyer for World Athletics, acknowledged that the organization's conclusion about Leeper's height if he had been born with full legs ''was not an exact science, but an informed estimate.''  Over the past decade, athletics officials have continually switched the methods used for determining how tall a double amputee should be when wearing running blades.  For a time, the regulations focused on the distance from a person's fingertip to the middle of the torso. The focus has included measuring the length of the ulna bone, part of the forearm. More recently, the focus was on so-called sitting height, or how tall the athlete is when seated on a box.  But some of the world's top experts in prosthetics say it's not clear that method can account for the spectrum of the human population. Also, some para-athletes may have congenital conditions that can affect the size of certain bones, which makes extrapolating height from bone length a fraught exercise.  Also, supporters of Leeper and other double-amputee athletes say whatever advantage the large blades might provide in straightaways is lost both at the start, because it takes longer for a runner using blades to reach maximum speed, and on the turns, which are harder to navigate on artificial legs.  In explaining the advantage of the running blades, World Athletics noted that, unlike other elite 400-meter runners, Leeper often runs the second half of his race faster than the first, though that also reflects how disadvantaged he is at the start.  ''Once the acceleration phase is complete and the athlete is able to run freely, the speed able to be achieved is substantial,'' the decision states.  The controversy over whether Leeper was running at a competitive advantage started in 2018, when U.S.A. Track & Field, the national governing body for the sport, informed him that the sport's international leaders had ruled it could not officially post his race times until he proved his blades did not yield an unfair benefit.  The International Paralympic Committee had recently changed its rule on how tall prostheses could make athletes, known as the maximum allowable standing height.  Leeper spent the next year working with scientists, who studied his running form and his blades, and in the summer of 2019 submitted his application to World Athletics for continued eligibility. The organization rejected the application in February, prompting the appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.  World Athletics had argued that someone with a torso the size of Leeper's would be 5-foot-9, according to standard metrics, and that his blades made him run as though he were 6-foot-8. In fact, Leeper was about 6 feet 2 inches on his old blades. The ones that World Athletics rejected on Monday make him about 6 feet, roughly the average height of other top 400-meter runners, many of whom have short torsos and long legs. Leeper's blades compress when he runs, just as the legs of a non-disabled runner do.  Blake Leeper, above in 2019, switched to blades that made him about two inches shorter in hopes of making June's Olympic trials. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLIE NEIBERGALL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004d "
69		"    Hopkins Pays Tribute To Chadwick Boseman  By Julia Jacobs  414 words 27 April 2021   4     ''At 83 years of age I did not expect to get this award,'' Hopkins said of his best actor win in a video posted early on Monday morning.  About four hours after he won best actor at the 93rd Academy Awards in an upset, Anthony Hopkins delivered his acceptance in a video from Wales, taking a moment to acknowledge the actor who had been widely expected to win posthumously, Chadwick Boseman.  ''At 83 years of age I did not expect to get this award -- I really didn't,'' said Hopkins, who won for his role as a patriarch struggling with dementia in ''The Father.''  On Sunday night, Hopkins became the oldest actor to win the award, almost three decades after his first Oscar win in the category, for ''The Silence of the Lambs.''  The award provided a strange ending to the ceremony. When Boseman was awarded a Golden Globe for best actor earlier this year, the emotional acceptance speech given by his widow, Taylor Simone Ledward, was the emotional highlight of the night. Perhaps with that in mind, the Oscars switched the traditional order of categories this year so that the best actor award came last, after the best picture had already been awarded.  Boseman, who had been widely expected to win, did not -- and Hopkins was not present to accept the award in person or virtually, resulting in a stilted, anticlimactic ending.  Social media erupted with indignation at the win, with many saying the award should have gone to Boseman for his role in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom.'' Boseman died of colon cancer at age 43 in August, months before ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' was released.  ''I want to pay tribute to Chadwick Boseman who was taken from us far too early,'' Hopkins said in his video, which was posted to social media.  Posted in the morning in Wales, the video was short and sweet, with Hopkins thanking the typical cast of characters in the caption to his Instagram post: the film's production company, his talent agency, his family.  ''Thank you all very much,'' Hopkins said. ''I really did not expect this.''  Anthony Hopkins won the award for best actor at the Oscars for his role in ''The Father'' -- and, hours later, he delivered an acceptance speech in a video from Wales. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Valerie Macon/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0004b "
70		"    D.C. Police Department Data Is Leaked in a Cyberattack  By Nicole Perlroth and Julian E. Barnes  944 words 27 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     The department appears to be the third police force to be targeted in a ransomware attack in six weeks, and the 26th government agency hit this year.  Hacked data from the Washington, D.C., Police Department started leaking onto the internet on Monday, making it the third police department in the United States to be hit by cybercriminals in six weeks.  A group that emerged this year called Babuk claimed responsibility for the leak. Babuk is known for ransomware attacks, which hold victims' data hostage until they pay a ransom, often in Bitcoin. The group also hit the Houston Rockets N.B.A. team this month.  In their post to the dark web, Babuk's cybercriminals claimed they had downloaded 250 gigabytes of data and threatened to leak it if their ransom demands were not met in three days. They also threatened to release information about police informants to criminal gangs, and to continue attacking ''the state sector,'' including the F.B.I. and the Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. The information already released appeared to include chief's reports, lists of arrests and lists of persons of interest.  The attack appeared to add another high-profile victim to what has become a digital plague in the United States. Since the start of 2021, 26 government agencies have been hit by ransomware, and 16 of those have been the targets of a novel extortion attack in which cybercriminals do not just hold data hostage, but leak it online when victims refuse to pay.  Police computers are especially vulnerable to ransomware because many run ancient systems and software. Although Washington's police force, called the Metropolitan Police Department, appears to be by far the largest recent victim, earlier in April, the police in the small city of Presque Isle, Maine, were hit by a separate ransomware group that leaked their data online, and in March, the police in Azusa, Calif., outside Los Angeles, were also hit.  The spate of attacks comes as the Biden administration is trying to step up the nation's cyberdefenses after a series of devastating and far-ranging hackings, including by foreign adversaries, against the federal government and a range of defense contractors, companies and other institutions in the United States. An executive order, meant as something of a first step, is expected soon from the White House. But officials acknowledge that the order alone will do little to stop the attacks.  Officer Hugh Carew, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Police, declined to answer detailed questions about the hacking on Monday, but said in a statement that the police were aware of ''unauthorized access on our server.''  He said the police were still working to review the unauthorized activity and to determine the full effect on their network. The department has asked the F.B.I. to investigate the matter, but the bureau did not immediately respond to a request for comment.  The police statement did not mention ransomware. It was not clear if the cybercriminals had successfully locked down the department's computer networks, in addition to siphoning out its data.  Ransomware dates back almost a decade, when Eastern European cybercriminals infected individual computer users in Europe with malware that encrypted their data until they paid 200 to 300 euros.  But over the past decade, cybercriminals have moved on to big targets in the United States: major corporations like Honeywell, which was the victim of a ransomware attack and data leak this month; cities like Baltimore and New Orleans; and police departments, schools and hospitals, each with increasingly urgent reasons for needing to recover data and digital access amid the coronavirus pandemic.  The pandemic coincided with the worst year on record for ransomware attacks last year, with ransom demands to victims averaging over $100,000 and in some cases totaling tens of millions of dollars, according to the Justice Department.  Last week, the Biden administration tapped John Carlin, the acting deputy attorney general, to lead a ransomware task force of F.B.I. agents and prosecutors from the Justice Department's criminal and national security divisions, among others.  ''Ransomware can have devastating human and financial consequences,'' Mr. Carlin wrote in a staff memo dated last Tuesday. ''When criminals target critical infrastructure such as hospitals, utilities and municipal networks, their activity jeopardizes the safety and health of Americans.''  Some 27 ransomware groups are now stealing and leaking data, according to Brett Callow, a threat analyst at Emsisoft, a security company.  ''The attackers are utilizing stolen data in more extreme ways,'' Mr. Callow said. ''In this case, they're threatening to release informant data to gangs. In others, they have contacted customers directly asking them to pressure victims into paying, to stop their personal data from being released.''  Mr. Callow noted that when the police in Dade City, Fla., were hit by the ransomware group Avaddon in December, cybercriminals leaked department data online -- including police photographs of dead bodies at crime scenes.  Beyond the release of such sensitive data, attacks on police departments can have devastating consequences on investigations. After a ransomware attack hit a police department in Stuart, Fla., in April 2019, prosecutors were forced to drop 11 narcotics cases against six drug-dealing suspects after critical evidence was destroyed.  ''The situation will continue to get worse and worse until governments develop an effective strategy,'' Mr. Callow said.  Cybercriminals claim to have downloaded 250 gigabytes of data from Washington's Metropolitan Police Department. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Yegor Aleyev/TASS, via Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r00040 "
71		"    Justice Dept. to Examine Louisville Police in Wake Of Taylor's 2020 Killing  By Katie Benner  1,408 words 27 April 2021   16     The force had come under scrutiny after the police killed a Black woman, Breonna Taylor, in a botched raid last year.  WASHINGTON -- Attorney General Merrick B. Garland announced on Monday a sweeping Justice Department investigation into the Louisville, Ky., police and the county government there, the second time in a week that the department has opened a civil investigation into a police force that prompted national furor over the killing of an unarmed Black person.  The Louisville police came under scrutiny after officers shot to death a Black medical worker named Breonna Taylor in March 2020 during a botched raid of her home. Her killing helped fuel nationwide racial justice protests, but an investigation elicited no charges in her death, only an indictment on a lesser count against one detective.  ''Louisville has already taken some steps towards reform through its settlement with the family of Breonna Taylor, as well as through other measures,'' Mr. Garland said in brief remarks at the Justice Department, where he was joined by the deputy attorney general, Lisa O. Monaco, and the associate attorney general, Vanita Gupta. ''We commend those measures, and our investigation will take them into account.''  Last week, Mr. Garland announced a similar Justice Department investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department, a day after the former officer Derek Chauvin was convicted of murder in the death of George Floyd.  Together, the inquiries show that the Biden administration is seeking to apply stricter oversight of local departments amid a national outcry over allegations of police abuses.  Louisville police officers have also faced criticism for their sometimes forceful response to protests, including the use of chemical agents and sweeping arrests. Justice Department officials said that no single episode, not even a high-profile police killing, would lead to a broad inquiry into a police department's conduct.  The Justice Department will investigate whether the police and the Jefferson County government engage in unconstitutional policing, including whether officers regularly use unreasonable force, conduct illegal searches, discriminate against minorities or flout legal protections for disabled people.  The investigation will also review whether failures stem from police policies, training and supervision, and whether officers are adequately held accountable when they break the rules. It is separate from the continuing criminal investigation into the death of Ms. Taylor that the F.B.I. announced last May.  Louisville has carried out some changes since Ms. Taylor's death, including the ban of so-called no-knock warrants, as well as the creation of a civilian review board for police disciplinary matters. But the federal investigation is poised to be the broadest review yet, and officials in Louisville portrayed it as particularly credible coming from an independent federal agency.  ''As someone who truly believes in police reform and doing things differently, which will only help us as a profession in the long run, I think it's a good thing,'' the Louisville police chief, Erika Shields, said during a news conference on Monday.  Mayor Greg Fischer called the review ''an opportunity'' for swifter and more substantial change that could put Louisville at the forefront of modern, equitable policing. ''America is at a crossroads with policing,'' Mr. Fischer said. ''We just happen to be the city we're talking about today.''  Senator Mitch McConnell, the minority leader and the most powerful Republican in Kentucky, signaled tacit support for the department's action.  ''Certainly there have been significant challenges there in my hometown since the Breonna Taylor incident,'' he told reporters in the Capitol. ''And it's certainly not inappropriate for the Justice Department to take a look at it.''  The department opened the investigation after it conducted an ''extensive overview'' of public information and gathered findings from people who live in the Louisville community, Mr. Garland said. Officials would not say whether the process began under the Trump administration.  Public pressure for police accountability has continued to mount in recent weeks with more high-profile police killings of Black people, including a motorist named Daunte Wright in the suburbs of Minneapolis, a 13-year-old boy named Adam Toledo in Chicago and Andrew Brown Jr., a man in Elizabeth City, N.C., who was killed last week while apparently driving away from deputies who were trying to conduct a search.  While police officials say they welcome the type of broad investigations that the Justice Department has opened in Minneapolis and Louisville, many object to so-called consent decrees, the court-monitored agreements that are often imposed on police departments as a result of the inquiries.  Department officials say that consent decrees create and enforce a road map for operational changes at police departments and help restore trust in the police.  But Jim Pasco, the executive director of the National Fraternal Order of Police, said they can deepen rifts between the police and the communities they serve by giving the impression that rank-and-file officers, rather than systemic issues, are to blame for past abuses.  He said that police officers were less willing ''to do appropriately aggressive things that keep crime rates low,'' like investigate a scuffle on a street corner, when they believed their behavior was under a microscope, and that consent decrees did little to address problems like resource constraints and high crime rates.  The monitors who oversee consent decrees also have little incentive to end them, said Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum.  Mr. Garland said in a memo issued this month that Ms. Gupta was reviewing monitors' roles in consent decrees and had until mid-August to make any recommendations.  Mr. Garland met on Friday with the heads of the nation's major law enforcement groups to discuss federal policing oversight. Along with Ms. Monaco and Ms. Gupta, he emphasized that the Justice Department relied on the local police to help the government on myriad issues, according to Mr. Pasco and Mr. Wexler.  Both men called the meeting a positive start to a discussion with many areas of disagreement. ''The team that is in place is one that will handle these things civilly and honestly, and speaking for the Fraternal Order of Police, we will do the same,'' Mr. Pasco said.  Law enforcement officials told the Justice Department that they were concerned about consent decrees, particularly the role of monitors, and that they were having trouble recruiting and hiring.  ''The attorney general recognizes how difficult the job of policing is,'' Mr. Wexler said.  Mr. Garland acknowledged that on Monday. ''We are uniquely aware of the challenges faced by those who serve as police officers,'' he said. ''We recognize the complex issues that make their already difficult jobs even harder.''  Mr. Garland said that investigations into their practices ultimately helped local police departments ''increase transparency and accountability,'' in turn building trust with their communities.  ''Community trust is essential to making policing more effective and less dangerous for officers on the street,'' Mr. Garland said.  Federal civil investigations into police abuses can take months. While federal officials notified Louisville officials on Monday that they would open an official investigation, Mr. Fischer said they did not give him an exact timeline.  Mr. Garland said the department would issue a public report when it had completed its work.  The NAACP Legal Defense Fund on Monday also asked Mr. Garland to suspend all grants to law enforcement agencies until the Justice Department confirmed that all of the recipients were in compliance with the portion of the Civil Rights Act that prohibits recipients of federal funds from engaging in racial discrimination.  A Justice Department official acknowledged the letter and said it would respond according to what the law mandated, but that in the meantime it would continue to issue grants to police departments. The Justice Department said on Friday that it was allocating $58 million in grants to advance community policing, combat opioid and methamphetamine use, and support mental health services for law enforcement officers.  The department is also working to hire more lawyers for the division that oversees policing investigations, officials said on Monday.  Will Wright and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.  Will Wright and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.  Attorney General Merrick B. Garland announced the investigation on Monday with Vanita Gupta, left, the associate attorney general, and Lisa O. Monaco, the deputy attorney general. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Mandel Ngan FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003z "
72		"    The Fed Grapples With Digital Currency  By Jeanna Smialek  1,745 words 27 April 2021   1     America's Federal Reserve says it is in no rush to issue a digital currency, but it is coming under intense and increasing pressure to research and understand the design and potential of digital money.  From the Bahamas to China, global central banks are experimenting with digital offerings, fueling concerns on Capitol Hill that the Fed might fall behind the competition. And breakneck innovation in the private sector suggests that the Fed, a key financial regulator, needs to understand budding private digital payment technologies.  Yet huge questions persist about a central bank digital dollar -- such as ''What problem would this solve?'' and ''How would it work?'' Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Fed, has been clear that while research is well underway, the Fed has a big responsibility as steward of the U.S. dollar, the world's dominant currency. It would not issue a digital version of U.S. currency without congressional approval, and it is in no hurry to upend the existing monetary system before it fully understands the consequences.  ''Does the public want, or need, a new digital form of central bank money to complement what is already a highly efficient, reliable and innovative payments arena?'' Mr. Powell asked at an event in March. It's a tricky question, and the central bank doesn't seem to have a clear answer yet. Here's why.  What is a central bank digital currency?  A central bank digital retail currency is, basically, electronic cash. Like a cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin, it is data-based and doesn't exist in the physical world, but the similarities end there. Unlike cryptocurrency, it is backed by a government, meaning it is likely to be more universally recognized as ''money'' -- something you can use broadly to buy goods and services and to pay taxes.  How is that different from the money in my Venmo or checking account?  You probably already use digital money. Most workers aren't paid in physical cash, and many people tend to buy their morning latte with a payment card or app rather than by forking over bills and coins. But the currency underlying paychecks and other day-to-day transactions traces back to the commercial banking system.  America's money supply is created by a sort of partnership between the Federal Reserve and private banks. The Fed transacts with commercial banks by crediting their accounts with a bank-specific form of electronic central bank money called ''reserves.'' Commercial banks can swap those reserves for dollar bills and coins -- physical central bank money -- which their customers can withdraw and spend. Banks also use reserves alongside other capital, like customer deposits, to make loans. When they do so, they create new ''private'' money that pumps into the financial system in digital form.  That bank-created digital money is what you are using when you swipe your debit card.  Private digital money carries a tiny sliver of risk compared with cash -- banks can fail, and deposits are insured only up to $250,000. People intuitively know this: Consumers rush to take out actual dollar bills during times of crisis.  A retail central bank digital currency would be equivalent to green paper bills, because it would have direct backing from the Fed. It would be like reserves -- electronic central bank money -- but available to the general public.  Who likes this idea, and who doesn't?  Banks are not keen on the idea of a central bank digital currency. Their lobbyists say the technology would disrupt their business models without offering benefits that the current payment system can't achieve.  Gregory Baer, the chief executive of the Bank Policy Institute, an industry group, argued in April that banks would not be able to lend against customers' central bank digital cash holdings the way they lend against customer deposits. That would crimp their ability to make money, so they would need to charge more to carry out everyday banking services, he said. And many analysts have warned that, without safeguards, a central bank digital currency might make it easier for people to pour into digital cash in times of trouble -- making the financial system more susceptible to runs.  Researchers recognize the potential for disruption, but some remain enthusiastic.  In an era when cash is going out of style, some central banks see digital cash as a way to make sure the public still has direct access to central bank money. Beyond that, the inception of digital currency might offer a chance to rebuild parts of the payments system from the ground up, allowing for broader financial inclusion, potentially enabling people without traditional bank accounts to send and receive money.  Digital dollars could also have policy applications, perhaps making it easier for the government to put cash straight into consumer accounts during recessions. China has been using its digital currency experiments for such economic purposes.  How far along is the Fed's research?  Mr. Powell has said researching digital currency is a high priority for the Fed, and lawmakers have kept the pressure on.  Bills proposed by House and Senate Democrats last year would have pushed the Fed to create consumer accounts and deposit central bank digital currency in them as part of the coronavirus relief response. The measures didn't pass, but they, along with China's development of a digital currency and private sector efforts from Facebook and others, have helped to light a fire under the Fed's research and development efforts.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has begun developing experimental digital currency code along with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the Federal Reserve Board is researching the technology and its financial stability implications. The Fed has engaged with international bodies like the Bank for International Settlements in setting out principles for digital currency design.  Lael Brainard, a governor at the Fed, noted last year that deciding to issue a digital dollar would require a lengthy process. Mr. Powell has since said Congress would need to be involved.  For now, research efforts into digital currency ''are intended to ensure that we fully understand the potential as well as the associated risks and possible unintended consequences,'' Ms. Brainard said.  J. Christopher Giancarlo, a former chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and an attorney who is now a director of the Digital Dollar Project, a private-sector effort to research an electronic currency, said it was critical to make sure the U.S. kept up when it came to developing the standards and protocols that would govern digital money.  ''It's not about being first, it's about getting it right -- I fully agree with that,'' Mr. Giancarlo said, echoing a line Mr. Powell often repeats. ''But to be on time, you've got to be early.''  Is the U.S. in a race against China?  Emerging markets with big under-banked communities or populations that would benefit from being able to more easily make cross-border payments have been among the earliest adopters of central bank digital currencies. The Bahamas introduced a retail payments digital currency called the Sand Dollar, which is available on iOS and Android, and Thailand is among the places that are far along in researching and developing between-bank, cross-border versions.  But one player in the central bank digital space has earned more headlines than any other: China.  Why the fuss? The world's second-largest economy has been trying out a pilot version of a digital yuan, putting small amounts of it in consumer accounts in cities including Chengdu and Shenzhen and allowing them to spend it. Researchers at PwC said in an early April report that the digital yuan had the potential to replace cash in circulation and that while ''some crucial aspects like an estimated launch timeline remain undisclosed, mainland China is currently believed to be preparing for widespread domestic use'' during the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics.  The question is whether the new technology is going to make the yuan an attractive alternative to other currencies. Chinese central bankers say it is not an effort to supplant the dollar, and Martin Chorzempa, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said digitization wouldn't fix issues that made the yuan unattractive as a reserve currency in the first place -- like capital controls, which mean you can't exchange it easily at all times.  Is Bitcoin coming for the dollar?  Others worry that private-sector innovations like Bitcoin or ''stablecoins,'' which are backed by a bundle of assets or currencies, could become an attractive alternative to government-created cash if central banks don't keep up.  Mr. Powell has argued that Bitcoin is more like gold than the dollar. It has value because it's rare and people want to hold it, so it can even at times be traded for other goods and services, but it is not government-guaranteed money.  But global regulators did slow down Facebook's stablecoin project, originally known as Libra and now called Diem, because they worried about the potential for money laundering and financial system disruption.  Mr. Powell said in testimony last year that Libra was ''a bit of a wake-up call that this is coming fast and could come in a way that is quite widespread and systemically important fairly quickly,'' highlighting the ''importance of making quick progress.''  If tech companies come to dominate the payment system, that could create privacy and stability issues. In fact, China's digital yuan was pursued partly in reaction to the rise and dominance of private-sector digital payment platforms like Alipay and WeChat Pay.  A faster or instant payments system, like the FedNow instant payment technology that America's central bank is now developing, could keep the Fed up to date without changing the system as much as a digital currency would. But digital dollar fans say the point is to prepare for the future -- and the future might be central bank digital currency.  ''Digital cash, if built in the right way, could be really groundbreaking,'' said Neha Narula, who is the director of the Digital Currency Initiative at M.I.T. and is working with the Boston Fed on its project.  Employees of the Coinbase cryptocurrency platform celebrated as the company went public this month. Unlike cryptocurrency, a central bank digital currency would be backed by a government. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD DREW/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B5)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003y "
73		"    Homeland Security Dept. Plans Extremism Review  By Zolan Kanno-Youngs  1,034 words 27 April 2021   17     The department that works to prevent domestic terrorism threats will conduct an internal review as part of a larger effort to combat extremist ideology in the federal government.  WASHINGTON -- The Department of Homeland Security will undergo an internal review to root out white supremacy and extremism in its ranks as part of a larger effort to combat extremist ideology in the federal government, officials said on Monday.  The task of identifying extremists throughout the United States, and specifically in government agencies, has come to the top of President Biden's agenda since Jan. 6, when a pro-Trump mob stormed the U.S. Capitol. Many of the rioters were found to be members of extremist groups.  ''We recognize that domestic violent extremism and the ideology, the extremist ideologies that spew it, are prevalent,'' said Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary. ''We have a responsibility, given what we do, to ensure that that pernicious influence does not exist in our department.''  The review comes shortly after the Pentagon completed a 60-day ''stand down'' to address extremism after a number of veterans were found to have taken part in the Capitol riot. The Biden administration is assessing whether other agencies will have similar inquiries as part of a broader review started this year to assess how the federal government combats domestic extremist threats.  The announcement on Monday highlights the administration's decision to prioritize combating domestic extremism after decades in which the government at times dismissed it as a minor threat or hesitated to invest additional resources to fight it. It is also a pivot from the approach taken by President Donald J. Trump, who pressured federal agencies to divert resources to target the antifa movement and left-wing groups, even though law enforcement authorities concluded that far-right and militia violence was a more serious threat.  The homeland security review calls for a team of senior officials to determine whether extremist ideology is prevalent in its various agencies, including the Border Patrol, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the Secret Service and the Coast Guard. The department works to prevent domestic terrorism threats, as well as conduct immigration enforcement, protect the president and respond to national emergencies.  Rooting out extremism across the government is enormously challenging; the military alone has 1.3 million active-duty troops. Homeland security is one of the largest law enforcement departments in the country, with more than 240,000 employees.  Gil Kerlikowske, who was a Customs and Border Protection commissioner under President Barack Obama, said that the internal review would be complicated given that many agents communicate on private social media pages or in chat rooms.  ''This is pretty tricky,'' he said. ''On every level.''  As part of the review, senior officials will establish an internal process for agents who are found to be associated with extremist groups or who espouse those beliefs online or while on duty, Mr. Mayorkas said.  He said he was ''mindful of the constitutional right to free speech.''  ''There is a marked difference between that right and violence in furtherance of extremist ideologies,'' Mr. Mayorkas said.  He added that the team would develop training and resources for employees, as well as hold listening sessions for officers and agents, similar to methods used by the Defense Department this year.  After its ''stand down,'' the Pentagon said a working group would be set up to examine how to better vet recruits and educate service members who might be targeted by extremist organizations.  The phrase ''stand down'' is used in the military to refer to any issue that the defense secretary decides is important enough that it needs to be addressed through discussions across the force.  Mr. Biden has made fighting domestic extremism an early priority.  Shortly after taking office, he ordered the director of national intelligence to work with the F.B.I. and Homeland Security Department on a comprehensive assessment of how the government combats extremism. The administration followed up with an intelligence report delivered to Congress last month that identified white supremacists and militia groups as top national security threats.  In a memo to all department employees on Monday, Mr. Mayorkas called domestic extremists ''the most lethal and persistent terrorism-related threat to our country today.''  The department will also issue guidance to employees in the coming days for reporting ''insider threats and other actions associated with domestic violent extremists,'' according to the memo. Mr. Biden this month released a spending proposal that included an additional $84 million for Customs and Border Protection and ICE to improve investigations of work force complaints, ''including those related to white supremacy or ideological and nonideological beliefs.''  The Homeland Security Department has faced scrutiny in recent years after multiple episodes of misconduct, including the revelation in 2019 that dozens of Border Patrol agents had joined private Facebook groups and other social media pages that included obscene images of Hispanic lawmakers and threats to members of Congress.  A Coast Guard lieutenant who described himself as a white nationalist was arrested the same year in Maryland for plotting to kill journalists, Democratic politicians, professors, Supreme Court justices and people he described as ''leftists in general,'' according to prosecutors.  Mr. Mayorkas declined to say in an interview how many active members of his department had been identified as taking part in the Capitol riot, citing continuing investigations.  Department employees have a right to share their views on immigration policy, Mr. Mayorkas said, and if an individual ''in a back office communicates anti-immigrant sentiment, that is one thing that may or may not warrant a supervisorial address.''  But if an ICE agent said such a statement while conducting enforcement, that ''could impair the integrity of the work of the department'' and warrant a different potential action, Mr. Mayorkas said.  Mr. Kerlikowske said the review could result in a backlash in the agency.  ''I think there's real potential for that,'' he said, ''if you're telling them what they can post and what they can't post.''  The U.S. Border Patrol detaining a group of asylum seekers last week in San Luis, Ariz. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM URQUHART/REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003x "
74		"    Fans of Chinese-Born Director Celebrate Her Oscar. Beijing Censors It.  By Amy Qin and Amy Chang Chien  1,268 words 27 April 2021   12     On social media, the director's fans blurred out her name and turned images on their sides to evade the censors. ''People should be celebrating,'' one writer said.  Chloé Zhao's historic Oscar win should have been met with jubilation in China, the country of her birth. On Sunday night, she became the first Chinese and woman of color to be named best director, for ''Nomadland,'' which also took home the prize for best picture.  Instead, the Chinese government imposed a virtual news blackout, and censors moved to tamp down or scrub out discussion of the award on social media.  Chinese state-run news media outlets -- which are typically eager to celebrate recognition of its citizens on the global stage -- made nearly no mention of the Oscars, let alone Ms. Zhao. Chinese social media platforms raced to delete or limit the circulation of articles and posts about the ceremony and Ms. Zhao, forcing many internet users and fans to use homonyms and wordplay to evade the censors.  No reason has been given for the suppression, though Ms. Zhao has recently been the target of a nationalist backlash over remarks she had made about China in the past.  Hung Huang, a writer in Beijing, said the state news media blackout appeared to be the latest symptom of the recent escalation in tensions between the United States and China.  ''People should be celebrating -- both Americans for giving her credit as a film director, and Chinese, for the fact that one of their own won a very prestigious international award,'' Ms. Hung said. ''But the politics of the U.S.-China relationship seem to have filtered down to the cultural and art circles, which is a shame.''  By midafternoon on Monday, The Global Times, a Communist Party-owned newspaper, broke the silence to urge Ms. Zhao to play a ''mediating role'' between China and the United States and ''avoid being a friction point.''  ''We hope she can become more and more mature,'' the paper wrote in an editorial that was published only in English.  Although some posts about Ms. Zhao's success made it through the filters, for the most part, the censors made it clear that the topic was off limits. Searches on Weibo, a popular social media platform, for the hashtag ''Chloé Zhao wins the Oscar for best director'' returned only the message: ''According to relevant laws, regulations and policies, the page is not found.''  Among the many posts that were deleted on Weibo were ones that expressed frustration at the attacks on Ms. Zhao.  ''At a time we should be celebrating Chloé Zhao, who has talked about the influence of Chinese culture on her life, there are still some people who are anxious to disassociate themselves from her and her Chinese identity,'' wrote one user on Weibo in a post that later disappeared. ''I think this phenomenon is not good at all.''  The controversy that had engulfed Ms. Zhao last month centered on remarks she made in 2013 to an American film magazine in which she criticized China as a place ''where there are lies everywhere.''  Nationalist trolls had also homed in on another, more recent interview in which Ms. Zhao, who grew up partly in the United States and now lives there, was quoted as saying: ''The U.S. is now my country, ultimately.'' (The Australian site that interviewed her later said that it had misquoted Ms. Zhao, and that she had actually said ''not my country.'')  Following the uproar last month, searches on social media for hashtags related to ''Nomadland'' in Chinese were blocked, and Chinese-language promotional material vanished as well. Although the film, a sensitive portrait of the lives of itinerant Americans, had been scheduled for release in China last week, as of Monday, there were no screenings in theaters.  The Oscars also came under fire last month for the nomination of ''Do Not Split,'' a film about the antigovernment protests in Hong Kong in 2019, for best short documentary. The Global Times said then that the documentary ''lacks artistry and is full of biased political stances.''  Not long after, reports emerged that broadcasters in mainland China and Hong Kong would not be airing the Oscars ceremony for the first time in decades. (One of them, TVB, a Hong Kong broadcaster, said the decision was commercial.)  ''Do Not Split'' lost to ''Colette,'' a film about a French resistance member who visits a concentration camp where her brother died. But its nomination alone had already helped raise awareness about China's crackdown in Hong Kong, Anders Hammer, the documentary's director, said in an interview before the awards.  ''The ironic thing is that this censorship and the actions taken in Beijing and also Hong Kong have brought much more attention to our documentary and also brought much more attention to the main theme of our documentary, which is how basic democratic rights are disappearing in Hong Kong,'' Mr. Hammer said.  Chinese reporters working at state-controlled news outlets had been ordered weeks ago to refrain from covering the awards ceremony altogether, said two employees of Beijing-based news outlets, speaking on the condition of anonymity given the sensitivity of the issue.  On Monday afternoon, there was no mention of the Oscars in the entertainment section of the flagship People's Daily website. Instead, the top stories included a report on rural tourism in China and another on a ''World Tai Chi Day'' event in Malta.  But Ms. Zhao's fans were undeterred by the censorship. On social media, they resorted to tactics that are by now familiar to many Chinese internet users: blurring out the names of Ms. Zhao and the film, writing backward, turning images on their side or adding slashes or exclamation marks between Chinese characters.  In their posts, many people praised Ms. Zhao's acceptance speech, in which she said she had been ''thinking a lot lately about how I keep going when things get hard.'' For inspiration, she said she often looked to a line from a 13th-century classical text that she had memorized as a child growing up in China: ''People at birth are inherently good.''  The line resonated with many Chinese who had also grown up memorizing those texts.  ''It's so hard to describe how I felt when I heard her say onstage those six characters in a Beijing accent,'' one user wrote. ''It may not be my favorite classical phrase -- I would say I don't even really agree with it -- but in that moment I cried.''  For many observers, the censorship was something of a lost opportunity for the Chinese government, which has long sought to replicate the success of Hollywood in projecting American soft power around the world.  ''The way she drew from her Chinese heritage in tackling difficulties is inspiring,'' said Raymond Zhou, an independent film critic based in Beijing. ''It's sad she got massively misunderstood due to a string of cross-cultural events.''  He declined to say more, given the political sensitivity of the issue, adding only that ''her body of work speaks for itself.''  Austin Ramzy and Joy Dong contributed reporting from Hong Kong. Claire Fu contributed research.  Above, Chloé Zhao with her best director Oscar. Left, people in Shanghai posed for photos with a video of Ms. Zhao's speech at a screening hosted by the Alumni Society of New York University. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD WAWRYCHUK/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE, VIA AMPAS/AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES; ALY SONG/REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003u "
75		"    California's Boom Vanishes: 'We Are at a Tipping Point'  By Shawn Hubler  1,019 words 27 April 2021   19     California will lose a congressional seat based on new census data, in part because of birthrate and immigration declines.  For generations, California has been America's boomtown writ large, with a population that nearly doubled to some 40 million in the last four decades alone.  California remains the nation's most populous state, an immense, churning window into a majority-minority national future. But new data from the Census Bureau released on Monday confirms what demographers have suspected for years.  The boom is gone.  Dampened by declining birthrates and federal policies that drastically slowed immigration, California's population increase of 6.1 percent over the past decade was the smallest in at least a century and less than the 7.4 percent national average, according to the census.  For the first time in its 170-year history, the state will lose a congressional seat, with the new numbers trimming its delegation in the House to 52 members.  ''We are at a tipping point,'' said H.D. Palmer, a spokesman for the State Department of Finance.  Mr. Palmer stressed, however, that the new census data reflected not a mass departure but a shortage of new Californians -- the result of postponed parenthood and blocked immigration.  Texas and other large Sun Belt states gained seats in Congress based on the new census numbers. But California officials and other experts said they were not alarmed, noting that several other large states lost seats, including New York and Pennsylvania. California's congressional delegation remains by far the nation's largest, and many noted that the issue was the pace of the state's growth and not a decrease of its overall population over the past decade.  Some also speculated that the pandemic may have artificially depressed census participation, although the state spent more than $187 million on outreach.  ''People who have a partisan ax to grind will no doubt use this to fuel the fiction that there is some kind of apocalyptic exodus from California,'' Mr. Palmer said, laughing. ''But from a data standpoint, that is not the case.''  Here are some of the reasons the state's growth has slowed, and why Mr. Palmer and other experts say California may be entering a new demographic phase.  Younger generations are waiting to have families.  Birthrates have steadily fallen in California since the aftermath of World War II, when the baby boom first sent the state's population soaring. According to state data, births have declined by more than 15 percent in the past decade.  The average age of first birth in California rose from 28 in 2010 to 31 by 2019, a function of living costs, employment prospects and the state's higher levels of education.  But California's baby bust since the last census has also been more acute than in the rest of the country. Take the fertility rate, which demographers typically define as births per 1,000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.  Nationally, that rate fell from 64.1 in 2010 to 58.3 in 2019 -- a loss of 5.8 births per 1,000 women of childbearing age. In California, however, the decline was 11.7 births. By comparison, the fertility rate in Florida dropped by fewer than four births.  California's baby boomers have aged.  In addition to lower birthrates, higher death rates have contributed to the slower population growth in California.  Driven largely by aging baby boomers, deaths -- not counting those from Covid-19 -- have increased by more than 10 percent in the state over the past decade.  Older adults have outpaced growth in children or working-age adults to become the state's fastest-growing age group. The state projects that by 2030, more than nine million Californians will be over 65.  Housing is increasingly expensive in the state.  The cost of housing is one of the state's signature challenges. Lisa Hershey, the executive director of Housing California, estimates the state is short at least 1.2 million units of affordable housing. The median price for a single-family home in California hit a record $758,990 in March, according to state figures, up 24 percent from a year ago.  In 2017, according to state figures, 1.7 percent of California's population moved to other parts of the nation, and 1.3 percent of the population moved to California from other states. In 2019, 1.7 percent moved to other states while 1.0 percent moved in.  Critics of the state's governance often contend that its system of taxation, which leans heavily on high earners, has driven out wealthy Californians. But research has shown that lower-income families are the ones departing.  ''The people who are leaving the state are the people who can't afford to live here,'' Ms. Hershey said.  Immigration slowed, especially during the Trump administration.  Though a majority of Californians were born in the United States, more than a quarter of residents have come from other countries. For most of the decade, immigration more than made up for the loss of Californians deciding to move to other states.  In the past several years, however, that stream of newcomers slowed markedly.  Immigration represented between 0.4 and 0.5 percent of California's annual population increase through the first half of the decade, according to Mr. Palmer. But starting in 2017, when former President Donald J. Trump took office, that began to decline, to less than 0.1 percent last year.  Among the policies that depressed immigration, state officials said, was the Trump administration's decision to sharply limit or delay applications for asylum and visas. Historically, California has been home to about 30 percent of the nation's asylum population, as well as hundreds of thousands of workers on H-1B visas.  ''Because we are a global destination state,'' Mr. Palmer said, ''what happens in immigration affects us disproportionately.''  California's growth was dampened by declining birthrates and policies that halted immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARIANA DREHSLER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003s "
76		"    Biden Forms a Task Force to Explore Ways to Help Labor  By Noam Scheiber  925 words 27 April 2021   4     The group will issue recommendations on how the government can use existing authority to help workers join labor unions and bargain collectively.  President Biden signed an executive order on Monday creating a White House task force to promote labor organizing, an attempt to use the power of the federal government to reverse a decades-long decline in union membership.  The task force, to be led by Vice President Kamala Harris and populated by cabinet officials and top White House advisers, will issue recommendations on how the government can use existing authority to help workers join labor unions and bargain collectively. It will also recommend new policies aimed at achieving these goals.  The administration noted that the National Labor Relations Act, the 1935 law governing federal labor rights, explicitly sought to encourage collective bargaining, but that the law had never been fully carried out in this regard. ''No previous administration has taken a comprehensive approach to determining how the executive branch can advance worker organizing and collective bargaining,'' a White House statement declared.  Unions have lobbied for the passage of the Protecting the Right to Organize Act, or PRO Act, which would prohibit employers from holding mandatory anti-union meetings and impose financial penalties for violating workers' labor rights. (Workers can currently receive only so-called make-whole remedies, like back pay.) The House passed the measure in March and Mr. Biden supports the legislation, but it faces long odds in the Senate.  The task force will focus on, among other things, helping the federal government encourage its own workers to join unions and bargain collectively, and finding ways to make it easier for workers, especially women and people of color, to organize and bargain in parts of the country and in industries that are hostile to unions.  President Donald J. Trump signed a handful of executive orders that sought to rein in union protections and bargaining rights for federal employees. The unions challenged the orders in court, and Mr. Biden revoked them shortly after taking office.  It is not entirely clear what kind of support the federal government could provide to workers seeking to organize short of changing the law, though some labor experts have argued that Mr. Biden and his appointees could use administrative action to allow workers to bargain on an industrywide basis, known as sectoral bargaining. That would make it less necessary to win union elections work site by work site, as is often the case today.  Seth Harris, a White House labor adviser, said the task force would explore the administration's ability to increase unionization through federal procurement law, which requires the president to promote efficiency in government contracts.  ''The simple fact of the matter is having a unionized work force means they are going to be paid more, they are more likely to be more productive, more likely to stay for a long time,'' Mr. Harris said. ''You'll have more skilled, more experienced workers working on government procurement. You don't have the same labor strife.''  As a general rule, the federal government probably cannot deny contracts to companies simply because they are hostile to labor unions, said Anastasia Christman, an expert on government contracting at the National Employment Law Project, a worker advocacy group. But in certain narrow cases, the government may be able to use its leverage as a contractor to encourage companies to take a neutral stance on organizing.  For example, if a federal agency were buying medical gloves from an aggressively anti-union company, it could tell the company that ''your vehement anti-labor practices have demonstrated a higher risk for a labor disruption,'' Ms. Christman said. She added that the agency might be able to conclude: ''We can't have $15 million worth of purple gloves stuck in a warehouse somewhere. We need to find a more reliable path to getting that stuff.''  Even before the announcement of the task force, many labor leaders regarded Mr. Biden as the most pro-union president in generations. They cited his quick ouster of Trump appointees they regarded as anti-labor, the tens of billions of dollars for shoring up union pension plans enacted in his pandemic relief bill and a video message during a recent union campaign at an Amazon warehouse in Alabama warning employers not to coerce or threaten workers who are deciding whether to unionize.  Many union advocates have compared him favorably with his Democratic predecessor, Barack Obama, who they complained was loath to support unions vocally.  The task force comes at a particularly frustrating moment for organized labor. Roughly two-thirds of Americans approve of unions, according to a 2020 Gallup poll, but just over 6 percent of private-sector workers belong to them.  Many union officials have cited the loss in the election at Amazon, whose results were announced this month, as an illustration of the need to reform labor law and develop new organizing strategies.  Mr. Biden's task force will solicit the views of union leaders, academics and labor advocates and is to deliver its recommendations within 180 days.  Labor Secretary Martin J. Walsh will serve as vice chair of the group, which will include Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen, Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin, the White House economic advisers Cecilia Rouse and Brian Deese, and the White House climate adviser, Gina McCarthy.  President Biden will promote unions through a White House task force. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003p "
77		"   GOOD QUESTION  What Goes Up in Smoke in a Candle's Glow?  By Randall Munroe  605 words 27 April 2021   4     Just saying, maybe go easy with the candelabras.  Where does a candle go when it burns, anyway? Is it healthy to be breathing in melted candle particles? How concerned should I be?  -- Abigail B., Washington, D.C.  When candles burn, most of their matter goes into the air.  The light and heat from a candle comes from the wax burning. When you light the wick, the flame causes some of the wax to melt, flow up the wick and evaporate, and then the wax vapor burns. The wick, which is made of cotton, also burns, although it's the wax that contributes most of the heat. The puddles you sometimes see around the base are from wax that spilled and dripped down without burning.  Wax is made of hydrogen and carbon. When a candle burns, the hydrogen and carbon from the wax combine with the oxygen in the air to become carbon dioxide and water vapor. Most of the matter in the candle ends up as these two gases.  Carbon dioxide and water aren't exactly safe -- too much of either can be extremely dangerous, as anyone who's been on a submarine can tell you -- but at low levels they are normal parts of the air. The amount of each gas produced by a candle is small -- comparable to the amount that might be breathed out by another person in the room.  If candles burned completely, every molecule from the wax would end up combining with oxygen to become COâ or water vapor, but candles don't burn perfectly. Around the edges of the flame, clumps of carbon molecules -- maybe 0.1 percent of the mass of the candle -- are flung away before they finish burning, sort of like bits of food sprayed out by a kitchen mixer. These particles contribute to smoke and soot.  Aneta Wierzbicka, a scientist at Lund University in Sweden who studies indoor air pollution, has conducted a number of experiments to measure particle emissions from candle flames. ''Candles, in homes without tobacco smoking, are among the most powerful indoor sources of particles, followed by cooking,'' she told me.  She said that constant exposure to these tiny particles can lead to cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. For people who burn candles occasionally, the fire hazards are probably a bigger concern than the air pollution. But she said that if people burn a lot of candles on a daily basis, it's worth taking steps to minimize exposure to airborne particles. She suggests making sure the room is well-ventilated, and using clean, white candles without too many additives or ingredients, since everything in the candle ends up in the air. (She also mentions that electronic candles have gotten quite good recently -- at first glance, some of them can even fool a candle expert!)  As a candle burns, the COâ and water vapor it produces will cool and mix into the air in the room, becoming indistinguishable from any other molecule of COâ or water. Over the next few hours, as the air in your room is exchanged with the air outdoors, the molecules from your candle will escape the room and begin to disperse into the atmosphere. After about a year, atoms from your candle will have spread completely around the globe.  For the next few years, every time someone takes a breath of air, they'll be breathing in a few carbon atoms from the wax and a few oxygen atoms from the air in your room.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003l "
78		"   LETTER  Lower Doses for Some?  213 words 27 April 2021   22     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  I read with interest ''Vaccines May Affect Women Differently'' (news article, April 18). It fails to address what I consider some other important questions concerning weight, dosage and side effects. For example, does one size fit all?  With regard to Covid vaccines, everyone gets the same dose, whether the patient is a 5-foot-2 woman weighing 105 pounds or a 6-foot-4 man weighing 210 pounds. And some individuals are more sensitive to medications than others, and are more likely to suffer side effects (including tinnitus, which I experienced).  I believe in vaccines, and we all hope they are successful, but perhaps there are adaptations that can lower the side effects that some experience. As I learned in nursing school, weight is an important factor that is often used to calculate an appropriate dose of medication, and failure to do so may result in various side effects.  Are considerations for vaccines different than for medications? Can alternative lower dosages be available and administered to those of various weights and sensitivities, especially if they experienced side effects with their first vaccination?  Diane R. Garvey  McLean, Va.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY James Estrin/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0003i "
79		"    Deaths; SPIELVOGEL, CARL  156 words 27 April 2021   10     SPIELVOGEL--Carl. What a great friend and what a great career. We were friends for almost fifty years and enjoyed so many wonderful times together: you, Barbaralee, Dalia, and myself. Dalia and I were proud of the fact that we knew you both before you knew each other. You had one of the most blessed marriages of all time, a truly loving partnership. Carl--you had a fabulous professional career, first at the new_york_times and then building your legendary advertising agency. At the same time, you were seated on the board of my Manhattan Industries company, where you were a wise and stalwart ally and superb director. The whole Leeds Family, especially my daughters Ashley and Tracy, sends their love and sympathy to our beloved Barbaralee, as well as the entire Spielvogel Family. Our lives will never be quite the same without you. Larry Leeds 1/3  Document NYTF000020210427eh4r0000d "
80		"    A First Step in the Hopes of Sharing a Journey With You  By Talya Minsberg  1,007 words 26 April 2021   2     Welcome to the Running Newsletter  By Talya Minsberg  Talya Minsberg here. I'm an editor on the Sports desk and a lifelong runner. While my 10-year-old self preferred the 200 and 400 meters (thank you, Mom and Dad, for driving my sister and me to practice), my adult self has happily moved along to road races, with most of my energy going toward marathoning. (Please, 2021. Please.) I still dream of cross-country races and muddy spikes.  This is the first Running newsletter we're sending from the Sports desk here at The new_york_times. (In case you missed it -- Jen Miller passed the baton last week.) We'll be covering the biggest news in the running world while helping you run your best, too. You'll be hearing from me, and many of my esteemed colleagues, in the weeks and months to come.  And we'd like to hear from you! What do you want to see in this newsletter? We're eager to hear your feedback. Shoot us an email at runningnewsletter@nytimes.com.  If you're not a subscriber, you can sign up here.  A Bored Des Linden Broke a World Record. Boston Is Next.  Des Linden was antsy. So she decided to go after a 50-kilometer (31 miles) world record -- a distance she had never raced before. (Professional runners, they're just like us!)  That goal came into view last year, when, like the rest of us, her world was turned upside down and she was hunting for new challenges.  She noticed the 50-kilometer world record was a breakable (for her, anyway) 3 hours, 7 minutes and started training. Last week, she crushed it, not only breaking the record but also reaching her ultimate goal of finishing in under three hours. Her time, a new world record, was 2 hours, 59 minutes and 54 seconds.  ''It felt like a very small taste of racing,'' Linden told one of my colleagues, Matthew Futterman, an avid runner himself. Futterman first caught wind of Linden's plan to go for the 50K record last October when he shared some 28 miles with Linden in New York City. Linden was finishing her calendar challenge -- running as many miles as the date on the calender every day during October.  Like so many of us, Linden has sorely missed the adrenaline of the starting line during the past 14 months.  Linden described these challenges -- racing against the clock, piling up miles during that 196-mile final week of October -- as ''necessary evils until we can do the thing that I like to do, which is race against other people, on tough courses against great competition.''  She finished fourth at the U.S. Olympic marathon trials last year, so she will not get the chance to race in Tokyo, but she announced this week that she will be racing in the rescheduled Boston Marathon in October, a race she won in a frozen deluge in 2018.  The 50K record came in an event with about a dozen other runners, several of them pacers, chasing personal goals. Nick Thompson, the chief executive of The Atlantic, who also happens to be one of the fastest 40-something male marathoners in the country, broke the U.S. record for the 45- to 49-year-old age group. He ran in a blistering 3 hours, 4 minutes, and 36 seconds, just under a 6-minute-per-mile pace (Way to make the rest of us running reporters look lazy, Thompson.)  If the most recent news from the New York Road Runners (see below) is any indication, chasing individual marks and concocting quirky challenges may not be necessary soon. The chance to race ''against other people, on tough courses'' (cough, New York City Marathon, cough) seems to be within reach.  In Other News  On Thursday, the New York Road Runners, the club that puts on the New York City Marathon, announced the return of its first regularly scheduled race since the beginning of the pandemic.  The club said that it would hold the annual New York Mini 10K on June 12. The 10-kilometer, women-only race has been held annually since 1972, with the exception of last year.  That's some pretty bright foreshadowing for the fall marathon season. Yes, we recognize that it is April. Yes, we recognize that we are chomping at the bit looking for a sign, any sign, that a return to more ordinary racing is on the horizon.  ''We've been saying the marathon is going to happen,'' said Kerin Hempel, N.Y.R.R.'s interim chief executive. ''It's more about what it's going to look like, and how many people we can accommodate on the course.''  Some Unsolicited Advice  Not the biggest fan of running? Would you like to be? Here's how Farah Miller tricked herself into liking running. ð¤  *  Need a good breakfast to get you out the door? Our friends at NYT Cooking have a collection of recipes you may be interested in.  *  Has it been a while since you replaced your running shoes? Here's how to know if you need a new pair. Bottom line: Trust (and support) your local running store! ð  *  Have you seen this 4x200 race? OK, not advice -- just a relay race that is not to be missed. This isn't the dramatic lean at the finish that you're expecting. Hint:  One last thing  Did we mention we're eager for feedback? We're all ears. You can reach us at runningnewsletter@nytimes.com.  ______  GET MORE SPORTS IN YOUR INBOX  While waiting for the return of normalcy to distance racing, Talya Minsberg, above, checked on her progress at Prospect Park in Brooklyn and Des Linden broke a world record in the 50K. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE new_york_times; LAYLAH AMATULLAH BARRAYN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4q0000p "
81		"    Biden Administration Partially Lifts Ban On Export of Raw Materials for Vaccines  By Katie Rogers  610 words 26 April 2021   6     Previously, Biden administration officials had pushed back as pressure mounted for the U.S. to help combat the surge in India.  The Biden administration, under increasing pressure to address a devastating surge of the coronavirus in India, said on Sunday that it had removed impediments to the export of raw materials for vaccines and would also supply India with therapeutics, rapid diagnostic test kits, ventilators and personal protective gear.  ''Just as India sent assistance to the United States as our hospitals were strained early in the pandemic, the United States is determined to help India in its time of need,'' Emily Horne, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, said in a statement on Sunday.  The announcement, an abrupt shift for the administration, came after Jake Sullivan, President Biden's national security adviser, held a call earlier in the day with Ajit Doval, his counterpart in India, and as India reports higher case numbers each day. On Monday, the Indian government reported almost 353,000 new daily infections, the fifth consecutive day the country set a world record. Ms. Horne said the United States had ''identified sources of specific raw material urgently required for Indian manufacture of the Covishield vaccine,'' the Indian-produced version of the AstraZeneca vaccine.  The situation in India is dire. The country is witnessing perhaps the worst crisis any nation has suffered since the pandemic began, with hospitals overflowing and desperate people dying in line waiting to see doctors -- and mounting evidence that the actual death toll is far higher than officially reported. Officials say they are running desperately low on supplies, including oxygen and protective gear, as a deadly new variant is thought to be behind a rise in cases.  Many Indians are frustrated that their country, the world's largest producer of vaccines, is so behind in its own inoculation campaign. Fewer than 10 percent of Indians have received even one dose, and just 1.6 percent are fully vaccinated, according to a new_york_times database -- even though India is producing two vaccines on its own soil.  Yet even as horrifying images of strained hospitals and orange flames from mass cremation sites circulated around the world last week, administration officials had pushed back as pressure mounted for the United States to broaden its effort to combat the surge in India. For Mr. Biden, the crisis in India amounts to a clash of competing forces. The president came into office vowing to restore America's place as a leader in global health, and he has repeatedly said the pandemic does not stop at the nation's borders.  But he is also grappling with the legacy of his predecessor's ''America First'' approach, and he must weigh his instincts to help the world against the threat of a political backlash for giving vaccines away before every American has had a chance to get a shot. As of Sunday, 28.5 percent of Americans were fully vaccinated, and 42.2 percent had had at least one dose, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  The statement on Sunday did not mention the possibility of the United States directly sending vaccines to India. But in an appearance on ABC's ''This Week'' on Sunday, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation's leading infectious disease expert, said the United States would consider sending some doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine there.  A patient breathing with oxygen provided by a gurdwara, a Sikh place of worship, inside a car on Saturday in New Delhi. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALTAF QADRI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00041 "
82		"    Police Shielded By 1989 Ruling On Using Force  By David D. Kirkpatrick  1,907 words 26 April 2021   1     Officers using deadly force rely on a legal doctrine set forth decades ago. Now, the movement launched by the death of George Floyd is trying to change that standard.  In case after case, it took only a split second for an officer to pull the trigger.  Adam Toledo, a 13-year-old in Chicago, had tossed away a handgun and begun raising his hands. Ma'Khia Bryant, a 16-year-old in Columbus, Ohio, lunged with a knife at another teenager. Tyrell Wilson, a 33-year-old mentally ill homeless man in Danville, Calif., had a knife in hand when he shouted ''Kill me'' at an approaching deputy sheriff.  All three were among more than 100 people shot and killed by the police over the previous six weeks.  The officers' justification for the use of lethal force in each instance differs with the circumstances. But as in almost every other recent case involving questions of police use of force, law enforcement officials defending the officers are relying on a doctrine set forth by the Supreme Court three decades ago and now deeply ingrained in police culture: that judges and juries should not second-guess officers' split-second decisions, no matter how unnecessary a killing may appear in hindsight.  Now, the national movement launched by the death of George Floyd, emboldened by an officer's conviction last week for his murder, is pushing to change that standard.  While most agree that officers must sometimes use deadly force to protect themselves or others, many criminologists say the wide latitude under the rule is an obstacle to reducing the number of police killings, and lawmakers in Congress and many states have begun seeking tighter restrictions.  The number of people killed by the police in the United States -- consistently about 1,000 a year -- is far higher than in other developed countries. A disproportionate number of the shootings are by white police officers against people of color, as in the cases of Adam Toledo, Ma'Khia Bryant and Tyrell Wilson. And many experts say the split-second standard is partly to blame for that death toll.  ''I am convinced that is the No. 1 cause,'' said Lawrence W. Sherman, an American criminologist with experience in the police departments of New York and Minneapolis who is now an emeritus professor at the University of Cambridge.  ''It puts the United States into an extreme exceptionalism in allowing killings that would be prosecuted as murder elsewhere, like the U.K.,'' he added.  Lawyers for police unions argue that the rate of police killings in the United States reflects a higher level of civilian violence because of greater gun ownership and a flimsier social safety net than in other wealthy countries. They say the split-second decision standard is essential to keeping officers and the public safe.  ''If the officer doesn't act, there's a strong probability that an individual will be killed,'' said Larry James, general counsel for the Fraternal Order of Police, pointing to the recent shooting of the 16-year-old in Columbus.  ''The officer is duty-bound to take that action to protect the life of another citizen or him or herself -- that is the standard that police should be judged by, not Monday morning quarterbacking,'' he added.  Until the mid-1980s, policies on the use of force varied widely across the states. Some allowed deadly action against any fleeing suspect of a felony, even if the suspect posed no imminent threat.  That changed in 1985. The Supreme Court ruled in Tennessee v. Garner that police could shoot only if they had probable cause to believe that a fleeing suspect posed a significant threat of injury or death to an officer or others. The number of police killings steadily declined over the next four years, studies show.  But in 1989, a more conservative court took a different approach in the ruling of Graham v. Connor, establishing the precedent that dominates today.  The case was brought by Dethorne Graham, a Black man the police had stopped in Charlotte, N.C., on suspicion of shoplifting because he had hurried in and out of a convenience store.  Mr. Graham, a diabetic desperate for orange juice to avoid a seizure from low blood sugar, told the police that he had rushed out of the store because of a long checkout line. But as he staggered and briefly passed out, officers assumed he was drunk and forced him into tight handcuffs, leaving him with a broken foot, cuts on his wrists, bruises on his forehead and an injury to his shoulder.  The Supreme Court sent the case back to a lower court, finding that the police needed only to meet the standard of what a reasonable officer might do. The criteria for ''reasonable,'' the high court said, should include special accommodations for the pressures of police work.  ''The calculus of reasonableness must embody allowance for the fact that police officers are often forced to make split-second judgments -- in circumstances that are tense, uncertain and rapidly evolving -- about the amount of force that is necessary in a particular situation,'' Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote in the majority opinion.  '''Not every push or shove''' was improper ''even if it may later seem unnecessary in the peace of a judge's chambers,'' the chief justice wrote, quoting an earlier ruling. The lower court ultimately ruled in favor of the police.  The Supreme Court opinion did not explicitly address lethal force and defined only the rights of a suspect, not the restrictions a state could impose on law enforcement.  But state legislatures and judges, often sympathetic to the police, largely adopted the question of what would be reasonable to an officer making a split-second judgment as the test for assessing any police use of force, whether deadly or not.  Graham v. Connor became ''the lodestar'' and ''created this impression that almost nothing is out of bounds,'' said Barry Friedman, a law professor at New York University and the director of its Policing Project, which has drafted a model statute to regulate the police use of force.  The same standard also became embedded in the training and practices of American police -- ''part of law enforcement DNA, often unnoticed as it works in the background to determine our actions,'' a magazine for police officers declared in a 2014 article about the ruling.  ''A generation of officers has been trained in the case's practical meaning and has spent decades applying it to every use-of-force decision,'' the article said.  It was published in response to a wave of protests over allegations of excessive force in the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, a Black man in Ferguson, Mo. In part because he claimed he had made a split-second decision about his self-defense, the officer who killed Mr. Brown never faced charges.  Many critics say the standard's narrow focus on the moment an officer pulls the trigger obscures questions about the many choices that led up to the confrontation, noted Rachel Harmon, an authority on police law at the University of Virginia. For example, she said, did the officer rush recklessly into danger or take steps to defuse the situation?  The same standard may also make it more difficult to combat racial bias in the use of lethal force, even though Black suspects are more than twice as likely as people of other races to be killed by the police, said Jeffrey Fagan, a law professor at Columbia.  ''All an officer has to say is, 'I feared for my life' -- those are the magic words,'' he said. But the statistics strongly suggest that the ''police are more likely to form that sense of imminent danger when confronting a Black person than a white person.''  Mr. Chauvin was convicted in part because he could not claim that Mr. Floyd's suffocation was a split-second decision. But critics of the split-second standard cite a litany of police shootings of innocent Black people. In 2014, Cleveland police officers screeched their cruiser to a halt just a few feet from Tamir Rice, a Black 12-year-old playing in a park with a toy replica gun, and within two seconds had shot him because they deemed him a threat. He died the next day.  The next year, a police officer in a suburb of Minnesota pulled over Philando Castile, a 32-year-old Black man driving with his girlfriend and daughter. The officer shot him five times at close range, killing him in the seat of his parked car, out of a mistaken fear that he might have been reaching for a gun.  In 2018, the police raced to a street corner in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn to investigate reports of a possible gunman, and moments later shot and killed Saheed Vassell, a 34-year-old mentally ill Black man who was well known around the neighborhood. He had been pointing a piece of pipe they mistook for a weapon.  The officer who shot Mr. Castile was acquitted of manslaughter. The officers in the other cases were not charged. The cities where Tamir Rice and Mr. Castile were killed paid millions of dollars to settle civil claims.  The split-second standard ''has become a way to insulate officers from any critical review,'' said Seth Stoughton, a professor at the University of South Carolina School of Law. A former policeman in Tallahassee, Fla., he testified as an expert witness in the trial of Derek Chauvin, the officer who killed Mr. Floyd.  Now, after the uproar over the Floyd killing, many state and federal lawmakers are trying to impose new restrictions on the use of force. A Maryland law passed this month over the objections of the governor requires that any such actions must be ''necessary and proportional'' to prevent ''an imminent threat of physical injury'' or to achieve ''a legitimate law enforcement objective.'' It specifies a prison sentence of up to 10 years for any officer who causes injury or death by violating those rules.  California, Illinois and other state legislatures have debated similar measures, and the House of Representatives last year passed its own bill raising standards for the use of force and requiring attempts at de-escalation.  Some police advocates argue that the new rules could violate officers' right to defend themselves.  ''With the benefit and luxury of hindsight and time and tranquillity, you could get any kind of use-of-force or police-practices expert or even an attorney to say that there was something else that an officer could have done,'' said David Mastagni, a California lawyer for police unions who has helped lobby in Sacramento against such restrictions. ''Then the officer is stripped retroactively of the right to self-defense.''  But Mr. James, general counsel of the Fraternal Order of Police, brushed off all the efforts at legislation and said he was not worried. Even if states or Congress pass stricter standards ''that trump Graham v. Connor,'' he said much would depend on whether judges continue to instruct juries, as they often have since the ruling, about the inherent risks of second-guessing an officer's split-second decision.  A man held pictures of George Floyd and Tamir Rice last week outside the Hennepin County Courthouse in Minneapolis. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMR ALFIKY/THE new_york_times) (A13)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4q0000o "
83		"    Biden Administration Partially Lifts Ban On Export of Raw Materials for Vaccines  By Katie Rogers and Sheryl Gay Stolberg  1,137 words 26 April 2021   6     The Biden administration, under pressure to help with a surge raging out of control, will also supply therapeutics, test kits, ventilators and protective gear.  WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration, under increasing pressure to address a devastating surge of the coronavirus in India, said on Sunday that it had removed impediments to the export of raw materials for vaccines and would also supply India with therapeutics, rapid diagnostic test kits, ventilators and personal protective gear.  ''Just as India sent assistance to the United States as our hospitals were strained early in the pandemic, the United States is determined to help India in its time of need,'' Emily Horne, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, said in a statement on Sunday.  The announcement, an abrupt shift for the administration, came after Jake Sullivan, President Biden's national security adviser, held a call earlier in the day with Ajit Doval, his counterpart in India, and as the Indian government reported more than 349,000 new infections, a world record for a single day. Ms. Horne said the United States had ''identified sources of specific raw material urgently required for Indian manufacture of the Covishield vaccine,'' the Indian-produced version of the AstraZeneca vaccine.  The situation in India is dire. The country is witnessing perhaps the worst crisis any nation has suffered since the pandemic began, with hospitals overflowing and desperate people dying in line waiting to see doctors -- and mounting evidence that the actual death toll is far higher than officially reported. Officials say they are running desperately low on supplies, including oxygen and protective gear, as a deadly new variant is thought to be behind a rise in cases.  Many Indians are frustrated that their country, the world's largest producer of vaccines, is so behind in its own inoculation campaign. Fewer than 10 percent of Indians have received even one dose, and just 1.6 percent are fully vaccinated, according to a new_york_times database -- even though India is producing two vaccines on its own soil.  Yet even as horrifying images of strained hospitals and orange flames from mass cremation sites circulated around the world last week, administration officials had pushed back as pressure mounted for the United States to broaden its effort to combat the surge in India. For Mr. Biden, the crisis in India amounts to a clash of competing forces. The president came into office vowing to restore America's place as a leader in global health, and he has repeatedly said the pandemic does not stop at the nation's borders.  But he is also grappling with the legacy of his predecessor's ''America First'' approach, and he must weigh his instincts to help the world against the threat of a political backlash for giving vaccines away before every American has had a chance to get a shot. As of Sunday, 28.5 percent of Americans were fully vaccinated, and 42.2 percent had had at least one dose, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  ''We're going to start off making sure Americans are taken care of first, but we're then going to try and help the rest of the world,'' Mr. Biden said last month, after he committed to providing financial support to help Biological E, a major vaccine manufacturer in India, produce at least one billion doses of coronavirus vaccines by the end of 2022.  But Mr. Biden's commitments have gone only so far. India and South Africa have asked the World Trade Organization for a temporary waiver to an international intellectual property agreement that would give poorer countries easier access to generic versions of coronavirus vaccines and treatments. The administration is blocking that request.  ''The Biden administration can still do more,'' Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California, who has been at the forefront of pushing for the temporary waiver, said in a statement on Sunday.  Mr. Khanna also called for the United States to release doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine -- which is not approved for distribution in this country -- to India, as it has for Canada and Mexico.  Tens of millions of doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine are sitting stockpiled in the United States, and Mr. Biden said last week that he was considering sharing more. But the vaccine was manufactured at the Emergent BioSolutions plant in Baltimore, where production has been halted amid concerns about possible contamination.  ''We're looking at what is going to be done with some of the vaccines that we are not using,'' the president said on Wednesday. ''We've got to make sure they are safe to be sent.''  The statement on Sunday did not mention the possibility of the United States directly sending vaccines to India. But in an appearance on ABC's ''This Week'' on Sunday, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation's leading infectious disease expert, said the United States would consider sending some doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine there.  ''I don't want to be speaking for policy right now with you, but, I mean, that's something that certainly is going to be actively considered,'' Dr. Fauci said.  India is home to the Serum Institute of India, the world's largest vaccine maker. But vaccine production has lagged behind the needs of India's 1.3 billion people. Adar Poonawalla, the institute's chief executive, appealed to Mr. Biden in mid-April over Twitter.  ''I humbly request you to lift the embargo of raw material exports out of the U.S. so that vaccine production can ramp up,'' he wrote.  But until Sunday, the administration resisted. Asked imprecisely by a reporter on Thursday why America would not lift its ''ban,'' Ned Price, the State Department spokesman, told reporters that ''the United States first and foremost is engaged in an ambitious and effective and, so far, successful effort to vaccinate the American people.''  The resistance was met with criticism from Indian politicians and health experts.  ''By stockpiling vaccines & blocking the export of crucial raw materials needed for vaccine production, the United States is undermining the strategic Indo-US partnership,'' Milind Deora, a politician from Mumbai, one of the hardest-hit cities, said on Twitter.  In addition to assisting India with protective gear and raw materials, Ms. Horne said on Sunday that the United States would deploy a team of public health advisers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Jeffrey Gettleman contributed reporting from New Delhi, and Chris Cameron from Washington.  Jeffrey Gettleman contributed reporting from New Delhi, and Chris Cameron from Washington.  A patient breathing with oxygen provided by a gurdwara, a Sikh place of worship, inside a car on Saturday in New Delhi. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALTAF QADRI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4q0000n "
84		"    This Week on TV  By Gabe Cohn  1,138 words 26 April 2021   4     W. Kamau Bell's documentary series returns with an episode on policing. And President Biden addresses a joint session of Congress.  Between network, cable and streaming, the modern television landscape is a vast one. Here are some of the shows, specials and movies coming to TV this week, April 26-May 2. Details and times are subject to change.  Monday  SESAME STREET: 50 YEARS OF SUNNY DAYS 8 p.m. on ABC. This two-hour special looks at the ways in which ''Sesame Street'' has addressed social issues over the decades, centering the show's recent efforts to diversify its lineup of muppets. Guests in the special include Gloria Estefan, Whoopi Goldberg, Lucy Liu and John Legend; the program would make a natural double feature paired with ''Street Gang: How We Got to Sesame Street,'' a recent feature-length documentary that looks at the making of the show.  Tuesday  TANGLED (2010) 6 p.m. on Freeform. Rapunzel got revamped in this Disney adaptation, which updates the look and pacing of that princess tale, and adds music. The result is a ''lavish, romantic musical fairy tale,'' A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The new_york_times, adding that the film ''has a story that takes some liberties with the genre; a nimble, kinetic visual style; and a willingness to marry complex psychology with storybook simplicity.''  Wednesday  PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS TO THE JOINT SESSION OF CONGRESS 9 p.m. on ABC, CBS, NBC and other networks (check local listings). President Biden will address a joint session of Congress on Wednesday night, in keeping with the tradition of presidents to give such addresses, rather than an official State of the Union, in their inauguration year. The speech may address climate change and racial justice initiatives -- particularly given that Biden will be speaking less than a week after he vowed that the United States would cut its global warming emissions at least in half by the end of the decade, and just over a week after the former police officer Derek Chauvin was found guilty of murdering George Floyd in Minneapolis.  EMMA (2020) 5:20 p.m. on HBO Signature. Anya Taylor-Joy was nominated for a Golden Globe for her performance as the ''handsome, clever and rich'' title character in this latest movie adaptation of the Jane Austen novel ''Emma.'' The story, about romantic entanglements among members of the upper class in the Georgian-era English countryside, is given a candy coating here by the director Autumn de Wilde, whose carefully-crafted, striking color palette may bring to mind another filmmaking confectioner. ''It initially seems that de Wilde has adapted the material using Wes Anderson software,'' Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times. But, Dargis, added, ''after a while, the Anderson-ish tics become less noticeable, and both the emotions and overall movie more persuasive. Much of this has to do with the pleasure of watching people fall on their faces -- and in love -- and with the suppleness of the largely note-perfect cast.''  Thursday  SPIDER-MAN: INTO THE SPIDER-VERSE (2018) 8 p.m. on FX. Spider-Man took his best-received swing through New York in years with ''Into the Spider-Verse,'' an animated action movie that reimagines the web-spewing hero as Miles Morales (voiced by Shameik Moore), a Brooklyn middle schooler who learns that he's one of many Spider-Man heroes from different dimensions. A.O. Scott called the movie ''fresh and exhilarating'' in his review for The Times. ''The story,'' Scott wrote, ''is clever and just complicated enough, moving quickly through silly bits, pausing for moments of heart-tugging sentiment, and losing itself in wild creative mischief.''  Friday  INTERNATIONAL JAZZ DAY 10TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This year's International Jazz Day All-Star Global Concert, with Herbie Hancock, Andra Day and many others, will be broadcast online in a livestream on YouTube and other sites beginning at 5 p.m. Eastern on Friday. On TV, PBS will air this compilation of archival performances from International Jazz Day concerts from the past decade. Selections include performances by Hancock, Wynton Marsalis, Stevie Wonder, Aretha Franklin, Annie Lennox and Hugh Masekela.  Saturday  TENET (2020) 8 p.m. on HBO. Christopher Nolan's latest sci-fi brain tickler was technically released in theaters late last summer, but most people didn't take the pandemic-era risk involved in watching it -- so Saturday's HBO release should stoke fresh discussion among new audiences about what the labyrinthine, time-bending plot is actually about. The film stars John David Washington as a C.I.A. agent tasked with taking down a villainous businessman, Andrei Sator (Kenneth Branagh). Doing so requires working with an ally played by Robert Pattinson and Sator's younger wife (Elizabeth Debicki), an art dealer who is undervalued by her husband. Washington's character, Jessica Kiang wrote in her review for The Times, is ''basically James Bond, forward and backward, a kind of 00700, right down to the occasional wry one-liner.'' The movie itself, Kiang added, ''is undeniably enjoyable, but its giddy grandiosity only serves to highlight the brittleness of its purported braininess.''  INSPIRING AMERICA: THE 2021 INSPIRATION LIST 8 p.m. on NBC and Telemundo. The NBC anchors Lester Holt, Savannah Guthrie and Hoda Kotb will host the first edition of this new annual event, which recognizes influential people who have used their platforms in positive ways. This year's honorees include Bubba Wallace, José Andrés and Claire Babineaux-Fontenot, who are slated to be interviewed during Saturday night's broadcast.  Sunday  UNITED SHADES OF AMERICA 10 p.m. on CNN. The comedian W. Kamau Bell's documentary series returns for a sixth season on Sunday night, with a timely episode about the history of policing in America. Bell, who was born in the Bay Area, focuses on Oakland, Calif., and the surrounding area, speaking with politicians, organizers and members of law enforcement about the state of policing in the country.  THE APU TRILOGY (1955-1959) 8 p.m. on TCM. The Indian filmmaker Satyajit Ray's much-acclaimed trilogy about a Bengali boy becoming a man -- Pather Panchali (1955), Aparajito (1956) and The World of Apu (1959) -- are best viewed together. TCM is showing them back-to-back on Sunday night, starting at 8 p.m. (All three films are also available to stream on the Criterion Channel, for those who don't want to stay up late to catch ''The World of Apu.'')  John David Washington, left, and Robert Pattinson in Christopher Nolan's ''Tenet.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY MELINDA SUE GORDON/WARNER BROS.); President Biden is scheduled to address a joint session of Congress on Wednesday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVAN VUCCI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0004f "
85		"   TIMES INSIDER  Covering a Different Washington  By Aishvarya Kavi  783 words 26 April 2021   2     Katie Rogers, a White House correspondent, talks about the changes a new administration has brought to the capitol, including a diverse cabinet and a lack of midnight tweets.  Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.  Thirteen weeks into the administration of Joseph R. Biden Jr., Washington feels startlingly different than it did under former President Donald J. Trump. Beyond the change in politics, Mr. Biden has brought a new approach to dealing with the media, has hired a more diverse cabinet, and has a different kind of relationship with his vice president. Katie Rogers, a White House correspondent for The new_york_times, discusses how covering political figures has changed under the Biden administration and why it now feels that there are more hours in the day. Her responses have been lightly edited.  Your recent story on the return of the weekend to Washington revealed how a change of power at the White House has changed the city. What inspired you to write it?  It was just a matter of having lived in Washington through the last four years of the Trump era -- D.C. had become a political battleground. The fact that President Trump had been removed from Twitter, restaurants were starting to open up again, people were starting to get vaccinations -- there was this sense of palpable relief. And we had a new president with little interest in owning every news cycle. He's not somebody who tweets at midnight on a Friday to fire a cabinet secretary. He has a completely different approach to politics than the one who came before him, and one guy's personality can really change how we live in Washington. There was this feeling that you suddenly have more hours in the day because you don't have to be on guard.  You also cover Vice President Kamala Harris. How has the president's relationship with his vice president changed from the Trump administration to the Biden administration?  In Vice President Kamala Harris, you have somebody who is still figuring out how to be the first woman, the first Black woman, the first woman of Asian descent, in a role that is already really tricky. She's with a president who understands how challenging that job is. They spend a lot of time together, and he very clearly wants her to be visible and close to him and empowered, which is also very different from how Mr. Trump treated Mike Pence. Even when Mr. Trump insinuated that Mr. Pence would endanger himself for not going along with his attempt to overturn the election, Mr. Pence didn't let that become a public issue. But Mr. Biden clearly is bringing Ms. Harris into the fold, and they're learning to trust each other.  How has the first lady, Jill Biden, changed the dynamics within the White House?  When you have a dynamic between the first couple that's based in honesty and mutual respect, the way that the Bidens have, the White House works differently. The president treats Jill Biden as his gut check. Among all of his advisers, she is the one who says, ''Joe, what do you want to do? How do you feel about this?'' That's not really the relationship that Melania Trump and Donald Trump had. Jill Biden is also much more practiced than Melania Trump ever was at being a public, political self. I think people close to this first lady would tell you that she's shy and an introvert and it doesn't come naturally to her. All of that may be true, but she's able to turn it on when she needs to.  What has surprised you about the Biden White House so far?  It hasn't really surprised me, but I think that this administration is disciplined in terms of messaging. It doesn't want any room for error. But the president likes reporters -- you can see him drifting over to them when he is heading to Marine One or answering questions in the Oval Office. He's not afraid of them. He can be the wild card, and I think that's in keeping with the Joe Biden that people know, so it's interesting to see it contrast with the very disciplined White House that he's built around himself.  Katie Rogers, a White House correspondent for The new_york_times, said the new administration of Joseph R. Biden Jr. seems to have changed how people live in Washington. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHEN TING FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0004b "
86		"    Michigan's Surge of Covid Sickens Younger People  By Mitch Smith and Sarah Mervosh  1,780 words 26 April 2021   1     ROYAL OAK, Mich. -- At Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, in one of America's worst coronavirus hot spots, entire units are still filled with Covid-19 patients. People weak with the virus still struggle to sit up in bed. And the phone still rings with pleas to transfer patients on the verge of death to units with higher-tech equipment.  But unlike previous surges, it now is younger and middle-aged adults -- not their parents and grandparents -- who are taking up many of Michigan's hospital beds. A 37-year-old woman on a ventilator after giving birth. A 41-year-old father. A 55-year-old autoworker who has been sick for weeks.  ''We're getting to the point where we're just so beat down,'' said Alexandra Budnik, an intensive care nurse who works in a unit with lifesaving machines, or circuits, that are in short supply. ''Every time we get a call or every time we hear that there's another 40-year-old that we don't have a circuit for -- it's just like, you know, we can't save them all.''  Across Michigan, which is experiencing by far the country's most dangerous outbreak, more younger people are being admitted to hospitals with the coronavirus than at any other time in the pandemic. Michigan hospitals are now admitting about twice as many coronavirus patients in their 30s and 40s as they were during the fall peak, according to the Michigan Health & Hospital Association.  The shifting demographics come as a majority of Michigan residents age 65 or older have been fully vaccinated, greatly reducing the risk to the most vulnerable and leading to fewer hospitalizations among the oldest age groups.  But the vaccinations of older people do not explain rising hospitalizations among people younger than 60, including those in their 20s and 30s. Public health experts say the outbreak -- driven by the B.1.1.7 variant of the virus, which is more contagious and more severe -- is spreading rapidly in younger age groups. And across the state, doctors and nurses are increasingly reporting a concerning trend: Younger patients are coming in more often with serious cases of Covid-19.  ''I am putting more patients in their 20s and 30s and 40s on oxygen and on life support than at any other time in this pandemic,'' said Dr. Erin Brennan, an emergency room physician in Detroit.  As Michigan has struggled to control another surge, the national outlook has improved. Cases nationwide have drastically decreased since a peak in January, and there are fewer than half as many people hospitalized.  With about two-thirds of the country's oldest residents fully vaccinated, younger adults, many of whom only recently became eligible for vaccines, now make up a higher share of total hospitalizations. But the number of people in their 30s and 40s hospitalized with Covid-19 nationally has also increased somewhat since March, according to recent C.D.C. data, with a more significant rise for people in their 50s. Hospitalizations among younger people have been up most notably in the Great Lakes states, with rises seen as well in the Mid-Atlantic.  The director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, was among those who warned that more younger adults were coming to the hospital with severe forms of Covid-19. The B.1.1.7 variant -- first identified in Britain and now the most common source of new infection in the United States -- is believed to be about 60 percent more contagious and 67 percent more deadly than the original form of the coronavirus.  Public health experts attribute the hospitalizations among younger people to a number of factors, including the B.1.1.7. variant and the lifting of pandemic restrictions around the country. Younger people are among those most likely to be out and about socializing and in the work force, at a time when just one-third of American adults are fully vaccinated.  ''The restrictions were our pause button,'' said Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. ''As soon as you press play, you are going to see the virus race back as quickly as it can.''  Some health experts said it was conceivable that more younger people were being hospitalized because some hospitals had lowered their standards for admission.  ''That's one explanation that you have to think about,'' said Dr. Amesh Adalja, an infectious-disease expert and hospital doctor in the Pittsburgh area, who said he sent borderline cases to be treated at home when hospitals were full. ''I have a lower threshold to admit when I'm not worried about hospital capacity.''  But at Beaumont, Royal Oak, in suburban Detroit, where case numbers remain high, doctors said they had not lowered the bar for admissions. The younger people in their care often had fewer chronic health problems and a good chance to recover, but they exhibited serious symptoms that required immediate intervention.  ''Some of them have kids that are younger than my kids, and you think about these people and the circumstances for their family if they don't survive,'' Dr. Felicia A. Ivascu said as she looked out over a unit where the sickest of the hospital's coronavirus patients were hooked up to machines in glass-walled rooms.  The escalating situation in Michigan has upended the lives of people like Matthew Kirschner of Clinton Township, north of Detroit.  After hosting a small lunch in his backyard late last month, when vaccines were not yet open to everyone in Michigan, several family members tested positive for the virus. Mr. Kirschner, 36, who transports Covid-19 patients in his job as a firefighter and had survived a bout with the virus last fall, thought he knew what to expect: He grew most worried for his mother, who is in her 70s, has underlying conditions and fits the profile of people most affected by the disease.  But it was his 37-year-old sister, Cara Kirschner Estrada, who ended up seriously ill.  Ms. Kirschner Estrada, who was seven months pregnant when she got sick, checked herself into an emergency room this month with a bevy of symptoms: fever, chills, a cough, difficulty breathing. Doctors did an emergency C-section to deliver her son, Angelo, who is doing well.  Ms. Kirschner Estrada's condition, however, grew precarious. She has been sedated at Beaumont, Royal Oak, and on life support, according to her family.  ''It is shocking. It is traumatic,'' Mr. Kirschner's wife, Lauren, said of her sister-in-law, who she described as an active young mother, working as a nurse at a wellness spa and raising a toddler. ''It's kind of rocked my view. I can't believe Cara. Why is it her?''  Nationwide, more than 45,000 people were in hospitals with Covid-19 last week, far below the winter peak, but up from about 39,000 a month ago. The hospitalization numbers have been largely stagnant for the past week.  The risk of hospitalization remains low for younger adults. According to state data from Maryland, where overall hospitalizations are up from last month, people in their 30s have a 5 percent chance of being hospitalized if they learn they have the virus, far lower than the 20 percent chance of someone in their 60s. But as more younger people get infected, experts say, more will inevitably be admitted to hospitals.  ''I tell everyone how bad it was and how scary it is,'' said Nic Cabrera, 26, of Oxon Hill, Md., who was hospitalized for five days this month and had to be put on oxygen.  The rise in hospitalizations has been numbing, if familiar, for doctors in Michigan. At Beaumont, Royal Oak, where nearly 200 coronavirus patients were hospitalized on Thursday, doctors discussed contingency plans to open more beds for Covid-19 patients if needed.  ''We were very hopeful in December when they rolled out the vaccines,'' Dr. Barbara Ducatman, the hospital's chief medical officer, said before leading her staff through a slide show of discouraging statistics. ''We didn't want to be here. It's like déjà vu.''  The vaccines only recently became available to all adults, and the rollout has not yet reached many younger people. In hallway after hallway at the sprawling hospital, doctors and nurses donned extra masks to go inside the rooms of Covid-19 patients and spoke somberly about seeing people of their own generation in dire shape.  ''You take it home a lot more,'' said Ms. Budnik, 32, the intensive care nurse. ''Your mind-set is a little different when you look at them and you think this could be my friend, this could be my sister, this could be me.''  Dr. Olusola Ogundipe, an infectious-disease fellow, said he noticed that some of his younger patients also had a tougher time emotionally with their condition. ''They have a feeling of immortality,'' he said, ''and so I think it does take younger people by surprise.''  Reports of new cases in Michigan have finally started to decline in recent days, but that progress is not yet evident inside the hospital, where emergency room doctors see as many as 10 new coronavirus patients per shift and where some of those who are admitted will stay for weeks.  James Dyer, 55, who works at a Ford plant, was just starting to feel better on Thursday, after three weeks in the hospital with Covid-19. Mr. Dyer said he had previously been daunted by the stiff competition to get a vaccine but now was eager for a shot.  ''I would definitely encourage other people to do it,'' Mr. Dyer said. ''And before I leave Beaumont, if I can, I'm going to get one.''  Not far away, Eleanor Wilson, 53, was on her fourth day in the hospital with a nasty case of Covid-19 that had left her gasping for breath and struggling to walk even short distances.  ''I think we all kind of think we're superheroes, like we'll be all right,'' Ms. Wilson, a day care provider, said. ''Once you get it, you're like, 'Whoa, this is not a joke.'''  But after a rough few days and a course of steroids, Ms. Wilson got good news: Doctors had cleared her to go home.  Sheri Fink contributed reporting.  Sheri Fink contributed reporting.  Beaumont Hospital's I.C.U. (A1); Amelia Crandall, a physical therapist, helping James Dyer, a Covid patient, at Beaumont Hospital. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRITTANY GREESON FOR THE new_york_times) (A6)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00046 "
87		"    What Biden Owes Essential Workers  By Eyal Press  990 words 26 April 2021   21     The Labor Department still (still!) needs to do more to protect employees from getting Covid on the job.  Since foiling Donald Trump's bid for a second term, Joe Biden has gone out of his way to send working-class voters the message that he, and not his predecessor, is the true champion of their interests. Shortly after he was inaugurated, Mr. Biden signed an executive order to encourage the federal government and federal contractors to pay their workers a $15 minimum hourly wage. He fired the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board, an anti-union lawyer and a Trump appointee. In a video tweeted in late February, Mr. Biden paid homage to unions and warned employers that there should be ''no intimidation, no coercion, no threats'' when workers exercise their collective bargaining rights.  Mr. Biden's video did not explicitly refer to a valiant but ultimately unsuccessful organizing effort at an Amazon warehouse in Bessemer, Ala. But along with his other statements and actions, it marked a notable shift from the more tepid relationship with organized labor that has prevailed under some recent Democratic presidents, including Barack Obama. It also signaled a decisive break with the priorities of Mr. Trump, who rewarded his working-class supporters by cutting taxes for the rich and gutting worker protections.  But there is one notable change that the Biden administration has not yet made: issuing an emergency temporary standard that would require employers to protect workers from exposure to the coronavirus by taking actions such as instituting mask-wearing requirements and social-distancing rules.  A year ago, union leaders and workers' rights advocates pressed the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to address the worst occupational health crisis since the agency's founding in 1971. Their appeals fell on deaf ears. Instead, OSHA issued toothless guidelines that employers were explicitly told were voluntary and created no legal obligations.  As a candidate, Mr. Biden criticized this approach, assailing what he called Mr. Trump's ''foot-dragging.'' The day after Mr. Biden was sworn into office, he signed an executive order directing OSHA to review the matter and, if warranted, to issue an emergency temporary standard by March 15. Yet more than a month later, no standard has appeared, leading some to fear that the idea has been shelved. Marty Walsh, Mr. Biden's secretary of labor, said on MSNBC this month that the administration was looking into the standard.  One potential explanation for Mr. Biden's own foot-dragging is that, with vaccination rates rising, the administration no longer believes action is necessary. But the threat to workers has hardly disappeared, particularly as new coronavirus variants continue to spread.  In Michigan, which has experienced a surge in Covid infections, more than half of new reported Covid outbreaks have occurred in workplaces. ''Vaccinations are helping, but we are nowhere near a situation where dangerous exposures are under control,'' said David Michaels, an epidemiologist at the George Washington University Milken Institute School of Public Health, who was the director of OSHA under Mr. Obama. A union representing workers at a pork slaughterhouse in Oklahoma, which has had one of the largest outbreaks in the meatpacking industry, recently filed a complaint accusing the plant of not taking enough measures to protect employees. (The company has denied this.)  Another reason the Biden administration may be hedging? Politics -- in particular, the desire to avoid antagonizing governors as well as business groups like the National Retail Federation, which has urged the agency to refrain from imposing ''inflexible and costly burdens on employers.'' This opposition is unsurprising: For decades, trade associations have opposed many new OSHA regulations, often warning that the rules will wipe out jobs and constrain business. According to Dr. Michaels, such fears have generally proved unfounded.  Although some states, including California and Virginia, have issued their own standards, employees in most places are still unprotected -- a matter that ought to concern supporters of racial justice no less than advocates for workers' rights. ''The essential workers getting sick are in occupations that are disproportionately made up of Black and brown workers,'' said Deborah Berkowitz of the National Employment Law Project. A case in point is the meatpacking industry, where line workers are overwhelmingly immigrants and people of color and where, as Ms. Berkowitz recently told Congress, more workers have died of Covid in the past 12 months than from all other work-related hazards in the past 15 years.  By issuing an emergency temporary standard that includes some basic requirements for Covid safety measures, the Biden administration would affirm that the health and safety of all working-class people matter.  During Mr. Trump's presidency, the term ''working class'' came to be associated with people who flocked to his rallies -- that is, with white men in MAGA hats. But the Black and Latino essential workers who risked their lives during the pandemic -- and some of the voters of all races who catapulted Mr. Biden to victory last November -- are no less a part of the working class. The Trump administration treated the lives of these workers as expendable. For moral reasons as well as practical ones, Joe Biden should make it clear that they are not.  Eyal Press (@eyalpress) is a journalist who has reported on labor issues for The Times Magazine and The New Yorker. He is the author of the forthcoming book ''Dirty Work: Essential Jobs and the Hidden Toll of Inequality in America.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Patrick T. Fallon/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003x "
88		"   THAILAND DISPATCH  Covid Surge Dashes Hopes of an Island Desperate for Tourists  By Hannah Beech and Adam Dean  1,410 words 26 April 2021   7     PHUKET, Thailand -- Around the corner from the teeth-whitening clinic and the tattoo parlor with offerings in Russian, Hebrew and Chinese, near the outdoor eatery with indifferent fried rice meant to fuel sunburned tourists or tired go-go dancers, the Hooters sign has lost its H.  The sign, in that unmistakable orange cartoon font, now simply reads, ''ooters.''  Like so much at Patong Beach, the sleazy epicenter of sybaritic Thailand, Hooters is ''temporarily closed.'' Other establishments around the beach, on Phuket Island, are more firmly shuttered, their metal grills and padlocks rusted or their contents ripped out, down to the fixtures, leaving only the carcasses of a tourism industry ravaged by the coronavirus epidemic.  The sun, which usually draws 15 million people to Phuket each year, stays unforgiving in a downturn. The rays bleach ''For Rent'' signs on secluded villas and scorch greens on untended golf courses. They lay bare the emptiness of Patong streets where tuk-tuk drivers once prowled, doubling as touts for snorkeling trips or peep shows or Thai massages.  Only a few weeks ago, Phuket seemed poised for a comeback. After a year of practically no foreign tourists arriving in Thailand, the national government decided that Phuket would start welcoming vaccinated visitors in July, without requiring them to go through quarantine. The project was called Phuket Sandbox.  But Thailand is now gripped by its worst Covid-19 outbreak since the pandemic began, spread in part by well-heeled Thais who partied in Phuket and Bangkok with no social distancing. The confirmed daily caseload -- albeit low by global standards -- has increased from 26 on April 1 to more than 2,000 three weeks later, this in a country that had about 4,000 total cases in early December.  For months, Thailand's strict quarantines, lockdowns, border vigilance and rigorous use of masks kept the virus at bay, although the economy suffered. But even as the last couple of weeks have brought repeated daily caseload highs, the Thai government is reacting slowly.  In early April, as cases began to mount, Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha reacted with a verbal shrug.  ''Whatever happens, happens,'' he said.  Desperate to resuscitate its tourism sector, Phuket, which had shut its airport during a Covid spike last year, continued to allow people in this spring on domestic flights, even as cases reached record highs. Only on Thursday did the local authorities start requiring Covid-19 screening for those arriving on the island.  ''If you ask me how optimistic I am, I cannot say,'' said Nanthasiri Ronnasiri, the director of the tourism authority's Phuket office. ''The situation changes all the time.''  On April 18, Thailand's tourism minister acknowledged that a July 1 opening for Phuket looked unlikely given that the plan depended on Covid being squelched in Thailand.  To prepare for Phuket Sandbox, the Thai government funneled many of its limited number of vaccines to the island, in hopes of achieving herd immunity by the summer. As of mid-April, more than 20 percent of Phuket's residents had been vaccinated. Nationwide, only about 1 percent of the population has received the needed doses.  ''I am very relieved,'' said Suttirak Chaisawat, a grocery store worker who received his Sinovac vaccine this month at a resort repurposed for mass inoculations. ''We all need some hope for Phuket.''  While the vaccinations may have given Mr. Suttirak some optimism, the present picture remains grim.  Normally at this time of year, Patong Beach's golden sands would be heaving with foreign holidaymakers.  But the beach is now almost deserted, save for a clutch of residents lining up for Covid tests at a mobile medical unit. Up the road, a monitor lizard, a creature more crocodile than newt, lumbered across the tarmac, with little traffic to impede its crossing.  Phuket's half-built condominium complexes are being reclaimed by nature, always a battle in the tropics but a lost cause when developer money dries up. Billboards for ''Exclusive Dream Holiday Home'' are stained by mildew and monsoon mud.  The Thai New Year period this month was supposed to be a dress rehearsal for Phuket's revival. Rather than foreign backpackers or business conference attendees, hotels tried to lure high-end Thai tourists who, were it not for the pandemic, might have decamped overseas for skiing in Hokkaido, Japan, or shopping in Paris.  But instead of prepping the island for its return as a global tourist haven, the Thai New Year may have wrecked the island's chances for a July reopening.  At festivals in Patong and at other beaches this month, thousands of affluent Thais partied, fewer masks in evidence than bikini tops. For some in Thailand's high society, Covid was seen as something that might infect vegetable sellers or shrimp peelers, not thejet set.  But then these beach revelers started testing positive, the virus spreading from luxe Bangkok nightclubs to Phuket.  The virus's resurgence after so many months of economic hardship is shattering for the majority of Phuket's residents, who depend on foreign tourists for their livelihoods.  As a 3-year-old elephant munched on sugar cane nearby, Jaturaphit Jandarot swung slowly in his hammock. There was little else to do.  Before the pandemic, he and the other elephant handlers on the outskirts of Patong used to lead more than 100 tourists a day, mostly from China, on 30-minute rides. Now there are no visitors.  ''I was super excited to hear they are going to open Phuket for foreign tourists,'' Mr. Jaturaphit said. ''Thai people don't ride elephants.''  Whatever the state of international travel, the elephants still need to be fed. Each month, a dozen beasts consume at least $2,000 worth of sugar cane, pineapples and bananas. The 3-year-old, little more than a toddler in elephant years, eats as much as the adults.  After Phuket's tin and rubber industries declined, tourism grew from a few bungalows on Patong Beach in the 1970s to a global phenomenon, attracting golfers, clubbers, yachters, sex tourists and Scandinavian snow birds.  Much of Phuket's high-end accommodation is clustered near the beach town of Bang Tao, a placid Muslim-majority community where placards for upscale wine bars mix with Arabic signs for Islamic schools.  Phuket's largest mosque is in Bang Tao, and this year the first day of Ramadan coincided with the beginning of the Thai New Year festivities, an auspicious augur after a year of economic hardship. The night before fasting was to begin, worshipers streamed to the mosque. Women chopped shrimp, banana flowers and armfuls of herbs for the feasting to come.  But at the last minute, the Phuket authorities called off mass prayers for fear of the virus's spread. Iftar, the breaking of the fast, is taking place in homes, not at the mosque.  As the local authorities traced Covid-19 cases on the island to the upscale beach parties, residents of Bang Tao grew frustrated.  ''We want to welcome people to Phuket, of course, but when they don't protect themselves and they bring Covid here, I'm a little bit angry,'' said Huda Panan, a primary-school teacher who lives behind the mosque.  Ms. Huda's husband is a taxi driver, but he hasn't worked for more than a year. Most of the mosque's community depended on tourism, working as concierges, cleaners, landscapers and water-sports guides. Now, some locals sell dried fish and scavenge the hills for a fruit used to add pucker to a local curry -- whatever they can do to survive.  On occasion, Buddhist temples, churches and mosques in Phuket distribute meals to the hungry. Lines are long. The food runs out.  ''We can wait a little longer for Phuket to get better,'' Ms. Huda said in the heat of the day as the daily fast grew long. ''But not much more.''  Muktita Suhartono contributed reporting from Bangkok.  Clockwise from top: Bars and nightclubs at Patong Beach on Phuket Island have been closed because of the outbreak. The international terminal of Phuket International Airport remains deserted. A Covid-19 vaccine was being given at the Phuket Municipal Stadium this month.; A resort on Phuket Island. Normally at this time of year, foreign travelers would be thronging the island's golden beaches. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ADAM DEAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003w "
89		"    Iranian Diplomat Says Tehran's Military Leaders Thwart Diplomacy  By Farnaz Fassihi  1,201 words 26 April 2021   8     Mohammad Javad Zarif, the Iranian foreign minister, described a rivalry with a powerful and widely revered military leader, Qassim Suleimani.  In a leaked audiotape that offers a glimpse into the behind-the scenes power struggles of Iranian leaders, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif said the Revolutionary Guards Corps call the shots, overruling many government decisions and ignoring advice.  In one extraordinary moment on the tape that surfaced Sunday, Mr. Zarif departed from the reverential official line on Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the commander of the Guards' elite Quds Force, the foreign-facing arm of Iran's security apparatus, who was killed by the United States in January 2020.  The general, Mr. Zarif said, undermined him at many steps, working with Russia to sabotage the nuclear deal between Iran and world powers and adopting policies toward Syria's long war that damaged Iran's interests.  ''In the Islamic Republic the military field rules,'' Mr. Zarif said in a three-hour taped conversation that was a part of an oral history project documenting the work of the current administration. ''I have sacrificed diplomacy for the military field rather than the field servicing diplomacy.''  The audio was leaked at a critical moment for Iran, as the country is discussing the framework for a possible return to a nuclear deal with the United States and other Western powers. Talks through intermediaries have been taking place in Vienna.  It is unclear what effect, if any, the revelations will have on those talks, or on Mr. Zarif's position.  The recording, of a conversation in March between Mr. Zarif and an economist named Saeed Leylaz, an ally, was not meant for publication, as the foreign minister can repeatedly be heard saying on the audio. A copy was leaked to the London-based Persian news channel Iran International, which first reported on the recording and shared it with The new_york_times.  On it, Mr. Zarif confirms what many have long suspected: that his role as the representative of the Islamic Republic on the world stage is severely constricted. Decisions, he said, are dictated by the supreme leader or, frequently, the Revolutionary Guards Corps.  Iran's foreign ministry did not dispute the authenticity of the recording but questioned the motive for the leak. Saeed Khatibzadeh, a spokesman for the ministry, called it ''unethical politics'' and said the portion of the audio released did not represent the full scope of Mr. Zarif's comments about his respect and love for General Suleimani.  In the portions that were leaked, Mr. Zarif does praise the general and says they worked productively together in the prelude to the U.S. invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. He also says that by assassinating him in Iraq, the United States delivered a major blow to Iran, more damaging than if it had wiped out an entire city in an attack.  But he said some of Mr. Suleimani's actions also damaged the country, citing, as one example, his moves against the nuclear deal Iran reached in 2015 with Western nations, the United States among them (the Trump administration later renounced it).  Mr. Zarif said Russia did not want the agreement to succeed and ''put all its weight'' behind creating obstacles because it was not in Moscow's interests for Iran to normalize relations with the West. To that end, Mr. Zarif said, General Suleimani traveled to Russia to ''demolish our achievement,'' meaning the nuclear deal.  Mr. Zarif took issue with General Suleimani on other fronts, criticizing him for allowing Russian warplanes to fly over Iran to bomb Syria and for moving military equipment and personnel to Syria on the state-owned Iran Air airline without the knowledge of the government and deploying Iranian ground forces to Syria.  By Sunday night, Mr. Zarif's critics were calling for his resignation, saying he had threatened Iran's national security by revealing to the world the country's inner politics. Even his supporters expressed concern that the comments could influence the presidential elections in late June and harm candidates from the reform faction, which Mr. Zarif is associated with, by reinforcing voter apathy and the idea that elected officials are not really in charge.  The leak follows a series of security breaches within Iran's intelligence and government circles that have been implicated in two assassinations and two explosions at the Natanz nuclear site. A former vice president, Mohammad Ali Abtahi, said that the publication of Mr. Zarif's audio was ''tantamount to Israel stealing the nuclear documents'' from Iran.  Some analysts said the audio would undermine Iranian diplomats' authority at a sensitive window of the negotiations.  ''This ties the hands of the negotiators,'' said Sina Azodi, a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic Council. ''It represents Zarif as someone who is not trustworthy domestically, and overall paints a picture that Iran's foreign policy is dictated by theater policies of the military and Zarif is a nobody.''  Mr. Zarif acknowledged on the tape that when it comes to negotiations, he is bound not just by the directions of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, but by the demands of the Guards. He said Mr. Khamenei had recently ''forcefully rebuked'' him for straying from the official line when he said Iran was willing to work with the United States to choreograph steps toward returning to a deal.  ''The structure of our foreign ministry is mostly security oriented,'' Mr. Zarif said.  Mr. Zarif said he was kept in the dark on government actions -- sometimes to his embarrassment.  On the night that Iran decided to retaliate against the United States for the killing of General Suleimani, two Quds Force commanders went to see the Iraqi prime minister, Adel Abdul Mahdi, to inform him that in about 45 minutes Iran would be firing missiles at a military base where U.S. troops were stationed, Mr. Zarif said. The Americans knew about the strike before he did.  Former Secretary of State John Kerry informed him that Israel had attacked Iranian interests in Syria at least 200 times, to his astonishment, Mr. Zarif said.  He also pointed to the cover-up of the Guards' downing of a Ukrainian jetliner in Iran that killed 176 on board on the morning after Iran attacked the air base.  The Guards knew immediately that their missiles had hit the plane, but only admitted to it three days later.  Soon after the plane was brought down, Mr. Zarif attended a small meeting of the national security council with two top military commanders, and said the world was demanding an explanation. The commanders, he said, attacked him and told him to send out a tweet saying the news was not true.  ''I said, 'If it was hit by a missile, tell us so we can see how we can resolve it,''' Mr. Zarif recalled. ''God is my witness, the way they reacted to me is as if I had denied the existence of God.''  Foreign Minister Javad Zarif gave examples of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, former head of the Quds Forces, undermining diplomatic efforts. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OFFICE OF THE IRANIAN SUPREME LEADER, VIA A.P.)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003n "
90		"    Top Prosecutor In France Says Officer's Killer Is an Islamist  By Roger Cohen  743 words 26 April 2021   8     The attacker watched videos 'glorifying martyrs and jihad' immediately before the stabbing, the official said.  PARIS -- Jamel Gorchene, the Tunisian man who killed a police officer Friday in a terrorist attack that has stirred a political storm in France, had watched videos ''glorifying martyrs and jihad immediately before he acted,'' the top French antiterrorism prosecutor said Sunday.  Speaking at a news conference, the prosecutor, Jean-François Ricard, portrayed Mr. Gorchene as an immigrant with a ''troubled personality'' whose radicalization went unnoticed by the French intelligence services before he stabbed the police officer in the neck and abdomen at her station.  ''According to two witnesses, the aggressor went back and forth in front of the building before he struck,'' Mr. Ricard said. ''And he cried 'Allahu akbar''' -- God is great, in Arabic -- ''as he stabbed the victim.'' Officials identified the dead 49-year-old police officer by her first name, Stéphanie.  The killing took place in the affluent town of Rambouillet, southwest of Paris, far from the troubled projects circling big French cities where many Muslim immigrants, mainly from North Africa, live. The misery in these areas and the failure of integration they represent have been viewed as one source of the Islamist terrorism that has been a recurrent scourge in France, leaving more than 200 people dead in 2015 and 2016 alone.  But, as the latest killing illustrates, the pattern of terrorist acts in France resists straightforward explanation.  Mr. Gorchene arrived in France in 2009 and lived for a decade without legal status, most recently in Rambouillet, before securing authorization to stay in 2019 and a temporary residence permit last year, officials said. Described as quiet and unassuming by neighbors, he left scant apparent trace of what the prosecutor described as self-radicalization through the internet before his attack.  Mr. Ricard said that five people, including Mr. Gorchene's father, had been detained by the police and that the Tunisian authorities were cooperating.  The attacker originally came from M'saken, the same town in northeastern Tunisia as Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, the delivery-truck driver who in 2016 plowed a 19-ton refrigeration vehicle into a crowd on the Promenade des Anglais in Nice, killing 86 people. In that case, too, the attacker was not on a French government database of radicalized militants.  Mr. Gorchene's status as an illegal immigrant in France for a decade and his subsequent regularization have contributed to a firestorm of criticism of President Emmanuel Macron's government as being too lax.  Several terrorist attacks since last October have turned security into a central issue of next year's presidential election. A poll published Sunday by the newspaper Journal du Dimanche paper indicated that 72 percent of French people regard the issue as a priority, below health care but above unemployment and fighting poverty.  ''Macron equals chaos,'' said Marine Le Pen, the extreme right leader who appears to be in a tight race with the president, citing ''the multiplication of terrorist attacks.''  Gérald Darmanin, the hard-line interior minister installed last year by Mr. Macron in an attempt to blunt Ms. Le Pen's appeal, has led the government's riposte, declaring in an interview in the Journal du Dimanche that ''our hand is not trembling.'' He said that at the request of Mr. Macron, he would present a new antiterrorism bill aimed at what he called ''an evolving threat.''  The bill, in preparation before the most recent attack, would reinforce the technological means the government can use to track messages on social media.  Mr. Darmanin cited the fact that intelligence services had missed the contacts with Syria that the Chechen killer of a teacher last October had, because he was using Instagram's messaging service. The teacher, Samuel Paty, was beheaded after showing caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad during a class on freedom of expression.  The period during which people convicted on terrorism charges could be subjected to various ''administrative constraints'' after leaving prison would be extended to two years from one, Mr. Darmanin said.  Asked if there was any danger of an infringement of civil liberties, Mr. Darmanin said, ''Let's stop with this kind of naïveté.''  The police in Rambouillet, southwest of Paris, guarded the police station on Friday where a female officer was stabbed to death. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ian Langsdon/EPA, via Shutterstock FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003m "
91		"   THOSE WE'VE LOST  Alber Elbaz, 59, Fashion Designer Beloved by Celebrities and His Peers, Dies  By Elian Peltier and Vanessa Friedman  1,312 words 26 April 2021   8     A favorite of celebrities like Meryl Streep and Natalie Portman, he rejuvenated Lanvin and had recently started his own brand. He died of Covid-19.  Alber Elbaz, a Moroccan-born Israeli fashion designer who rejuvenated Lanvin and had recently started a new venture, AZ Factory, died on Saturday in Paris. He was 59.  The cause was Covid-19, Richemont, the company backing Mr. Elbaz's brand, said.  Beloved not only by his celebrity clients like Meryl Streep and Natalie Portman but also by his peers, Mr. Elbaz was that rare character in fashion: a truly empathetic and generous designer, both in the clothes he made and in the way he conducted himself within the business. The graceful lines of his dresses mimicked the graceful lines of his life.  ''Alber always thought of fashion as an embrace of life at its best,'' said Anna Wintour, the global chief content officer for Condé Nast and editor of Vogue. ''And when we wore his clothes, or were in his wonderful, joyful presence, we felt that, too.''  Designers like Pierpaolo Piccioli of Valentino and Stella McCartney all paid tribute to what Mr. Piccioli called one of fashion's ''biggest treasures.''  Mr. Elbaz had launched AZ Factory after a five-year hiatus following his abrupt firing from Lanvin, where he was fashion director from 2001 to 2015. During his time there, he turned Lanvin, the oldest surviving but dusty French fashion house, into a more modern and prominent brand whose creations were worn by the likes of Beyoncé, Lupita Nyong'o, Pharrell Williams, Michelle Obama and Harry Styles.  Mr. Elbaz was known for his self-deprecating humor and his insecurities. He had a fraught, public relationship with his weight and said that being skinny was a fantasy that influenced his work. He transformed that fantasy into lightness, he said, by turning his creations into comfortable and sometimes subtly eccentric clothes.  Ms. Portman once called him the ''ultimate fashion philosopher-mentor.''  ''He says things to me like: 'Wear flats. You're short. It's much cooler not to pretend,''' Ms. Portman told Time magazine in 2007, when it named Mr. Elbaz one of the world's 100 most influential people.  In recent years he had become something of a one-man advocate for reform of the fashion system and the pressures increasingly placed on designers.  As he said in 2015, as he received the Fashion Group International award, ''We designers, we started as couturiers,'' asking: 'What do women want? What do women need? What can I do for a woman to make her life better and easier? How can I make a woman more beautiful?'''  Then, he said, ''we became creative directors, so we have to create, but mostly direct.''  ''And now,'' he continued, ''we have to become image-makers, creating a buzz, making sure that it looks good in the pictures. The screen has to scream, baby. That's the rule. Loudness is the new cool, and not only in fashion, you know. I prefer whispering.''  The world of intricate dresses, cat walks and red carpets was one that he embraced publicly but remained wary of.  ''You have to go back to nothing in order to maintain the dream,'' Mr. Elbaz told The New Yorker in 2009. ''The moment the dream becomes reality and you start to mingle too much with all these people--'' He left the comment unfinished.  Still, luxury clothes came with a price that he readily justified. He once compared a fashion collection to a vaccine -- an easy product to duplicate, but not something cheap to create.  Albert Elbaz was born in Casablanca, Morocco, on June 12, 1961, and grew up in Israel. His mother, Alegria, was a painter, and his father, Meyer, a colorist in a hair salon. Though he dreamed of becoming a doctor as a child -- he always called himself a terrible hypochondriac -- fashion proved a better route to helping people.  After studying design at Shenkar College of Engineering, Design and Art in Tel Aviv in the mid-1980s and a brief stint in the Israeli army, he moved to New York, where he removed the T from his first name so that it would not be mispronounced, and because ''Alber Elbaz,'' he thought, made for a more balanced brand name.  His survivors include a brother and two sisters as well as his partner, Alex Koo.  In New York, Mr. Elbaz became the assistant designer of Geoffrey Beene. He then moved to Paris in 1996 to become the head of prêt-à-porter design at Guy Laroche. Two years later, Yves Saint Laurent chose Mr. Elbaz to take over as his heir, designing the women's Rive Gauche ready-to-wear collections for YSL.  That dream, however, was short-lived, as Gucci Group bought the brand in 1999 and Mr. Elbaz was soon fired in favor of Tom Ford. It was a crushing blow and started Mr. Elbaz on his journey questioning fashion.  In 2001, he met Shaw-Lan Wang, a Taiwan-based, Chinese-born former media mogul who was part of a consortium that had purchased Lanvin, and persuaded her to ''awake the sleeping beauty,'' as he put it. Their partnership led to an aesthetic flowering as Mr. Elbaz experimented with dresses made from a single seam and clothes that managed to be both generous and elegant, straddling the line between classicism and modernism.  ''Alber would always tell me, 'I am just a dressmaker','' said Ms. Wintour of Vogue. ''He was, if by that we mean someone who had the enviable ability to make something women would love to wear -- and an incredible instinct for how they would want to feel when they were wearing it.''  Mr. Elbaz received the International Award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America in 2005 and was named one of Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in 2007. In 2016, the French government named him an Officier of the Légion d'Honneur.  Aside from a hit sneaker, however, Mr. Elbaz never quite managed to create the It bag that could power a brand forward in a world driven by accessories, and after repeated clashes with Madame Wang over the future of Lanvin, he was fired, to the shock of the industry.  For the next five years Mr. Elbaz wandered the world, taking meetings in Silicon Valley and Switzerland, dipping in and out of collaborations with brands like Tod's and Le Sportsac, and trying to decide what to do next.  His answer was a new brand, AZ Factory -- which was backed by Richemont, the Swiss luxury company -- based on the idea of making clothes to solve women's problems, at a more accessible price, sold directly to them, without heed of season, size or dictat, using technology at the service of beauty.  ''I asked myself, 'If I was a woman, what would I want?''' Mr. Elbaz told The new_york_times in January. ''Something that is first comfortable. Something fun. Something that lets me eat a big piece of cake.''  That allowed him to create the most simple things he had ever made, he said -- although he had also compared the formation of his new brand to giving birth.  ''My hormones are burning,'' Mr. Elbaz added. ''I'm so itchy. I cry and laugh within seconds.'' Still, he said, he was thrilled to be back.  Elizabeth Paton contributed reporting.  Elizabeth Paton contributed reporting.  Designs by Alber Elbaz for Lanvin at the autumn/winter 2011-2012 ready-to-wear show in Paris.; Mr. Elbaz designed for Lanvin for 14 years. Here are some of his clothes from a 2008 show in Paris.; Mr. Elbaz in 2011. He had started a new venture, AZ Factory. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FRANCOIS GUILLOT/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003k "
92		"    Behind British Fears Of American Chickens  By David Segal  1,360 words 26 April 2021   1     LONDON -- In this post-Brexit, mid-pandemic moment in the United Kingdom, with its economy battered by recession and the royal family in mourning and turmoil, it is hard to find a topic that unites this fractious nation. But U.S. chickens -- yes, the lowly, clucking farm animal, consumed daily by the millions in all 50 states -- have done it.  Everybody hates them.  The odd thing is that U.S. chicken is not sold anywhere in Britain, and if people here get their way, it never will be.  What precisely have U.S. chickens done to so thoroughly appall the British, even though few of the latter have ever sampled the former?  The short answer is that some U.S. chicken carcasses are washed in chlorine, to eliminate potentially harmful pathogens. Americans for years have been devouring these birds without any fuss, but in Britain, U.S. chickens are now attached to the word ''chlorinated'' the way warning labels are attached to cigarettes -- which is to say, always. U.S. chickens have been denounced by editorialists, academics, politicians, farmers and a wide variety of activists. In October, a group of protesters dressed in chicken costumes milled around Parliament.  ''Caution Chlorine'' was emblazoned, in a hazmat-style font, on the front of their yellow onesies.  U.S. poultry has long been derided in the United Kingdom, but didn't become an object of public vitriol until it became clear, several years ago, that the two countries would sign a new free-trade agreement once Britain left the European Union. Arguably the largest anticipated sticking point in any such deal centers on U.S. food standards, which are widely regarded here as subpar and tolerant of filth and shabby conditions in the quest for profits.  It's all a big smear, says the U.S. poultry industry, and an excuse to keep a British industry from competing with far larger American rivals. But dig a little and it's quickly clear that chlorine chicken phobia is about more than edible birds. Somehow, the American handling of Gallus gallus domesticus, as it's known to scientists, has become a symbol of British fears that, without the proper guardrails, a trade deal with the United States will change Britain for the worse.  ''This is a classic example of how belief has overtaken evidence and become embedded in a complex sociopolitical discourse which is almost certainly motivated by something very different from that actual issue,'' said Ian Boyd, a professor of biology at the University of St. Andrews. ''Chlorine-washed chicken is almost certainly a proxy for much deeper issues concerning trust.''  The specifics of this mistrust are hard to pin down. Most involve a free-floating sense that the United States is a heedless juggernaut and if trade between the two countries -- now worth roughly $230 billion a year -- is unfettered, there is no telling what Americans will peddle and ruin.  A similar dread was evident in the case articulated by some Brexiteers. The United Kingdom is singular, and wrapping it into a union of 27 other states undermined its uniqueness, went the argument. The word ''sovereignty'' came up a lot, along with the suggestion that much of it had been lost to the rest of Europe and had to be reclaimed.  In a way, ''chlorinated chicken'' is the new sovereignty, and that is reflected in some of the language used by vocal critics. Like Tim Lang, an emeritus professor of food policy, who said in an interview: ''The issue is whether the United Kingdom will become the 51st state of America.''  To Professor Lang, the prospect of a U.S. poultry invasion is not just an abstract anxiety about agricultural imperialism. It's a matter of health and safety. He noted that in the late '80s and early '90s, Brits were rattled by a number of high-profile food scares and outbreaks involving salmonella, E. coli and mad cow disease. The Food Standards Agency was created in 2000 with a remit to rethink the country's processing systems. Around the same time, the European Union adopted what it calls the precautionary principle on food and environmental safety.  ''If in doubt,'' he wrote in an email, summarizing the principle, ''the consumer or eco interest triumph over business. Better to assume there might be a problem than pooh-pooh it only to find there were problems later on.''  He and others say the U.S. food processing approach is to let hygiene slide during feeding, growing and slaughtering, and then make up for lapses at the end with a good disinfectant. It doesn't work particularly well, critics say. As evidence, Prof. Lang had a colleague forward an article that quoted the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which stated that one in six American suffered from a food-borne illness every year. In the United Kingdom, that figure as tallied by the Food Standards Agency, the article continued, is one in 60.  The chlorine dunk isn't just kind of gross, in other words. It's ineffective.  Nonsense, says Tom Super, spokesman for the National Chicken Council, which represents the companies that process about 95 percent of U.S. chicken. He pointed out that the United Kingdom's Food Standards Agency's own website offers a caution about comparing food-borne illness numbers between countries.  ''The range of study methodologies vary among and within countries,'' the site reads. ''This makes any comparison and interpretation of differences challenging.''  Mr. Super notes that only 5 percent of chickens are now washed with chlorine because the industry has moved on to a better cleaner. (Peracetic acid, if you're curious.) But focusing on how chickens are washed misses the safety and care built into the U.S. system, he added, starting with how eggs are hatched and chickens are fed. Lower hygiene standards? A total canard, an excuse for protectionism, he says, and one that glosses over the findings of the European Food Safety Authority, which in 2008 could find no evidence that chlorinated chickens are unsafe.  ''The science is on our side; the data is on our side,'' said Mr. Super. ''Americans eat about 150 million servings of chicken a day, and virtually all are eaten safely. We'd send the same chicken to the U.K. that we now feed our kids and that we send to 100 countries around the world.''  The timing for any United States-British trade deal is unknown; the Biden administration has said little on the subject. Katherine Tai, the U.S. trade representative, said at her confirmation hearing that she wanted a pact that ''prioritizes the interest of America's workers and supports a strong recovery for our economy.''  Several trade experts said that negotiations could take years, largely because the deal doesn't seem to be a high priority in the United States. But a long wait might be just what the British need, said Professor Boyd of St. Andrews. Agriculture here has long had a claim on the national psyche that far outweighs its actual economic significance, he explained. Consumers here are more interested in sustaining an institution -- farming -- than buying slightly cheaper cutlets. And lecturing the British public about studies and test results won't change that.  ''If we were to address fears about U.S. chicken with evidence-based arguments and expensive publicity campaigns, then something else would arise,'' Professor Boyd said. ''This is a sociopolitical problem which will be resolved through enlightened partnership to build a trading relationship, not by browbeating people with scientific facts.''  David Henig, director of the U.K. Trade Policy Project, which is part of a think tank in Brussels, said trade between the countries will carry on, using terms and agreements that have been in place for years, he said. When the United States is prepared to tackle the thornier issues, the British will be ready.  ''The U.K. side is keen for a deal,'' he said. ''It's just not keen about the chickens.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tom Grillo FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003g "
93		"    Out of Money and Volunteers, Rural Ambulances Drift to a Dead End  By Ali Watkins  1,689 words 26 April 2021   12     Strained by pandemic-era budget cuts, stress and a lack of revenue, at least 10 ambulance companies in Wyoming are in danger of shuttering -- some imminently.  WORLAND, Wyo. -- For three years, Luke Sypherd has run the small volunteer ambulance crew that services Washakie County, Wyo., caring for the county's 7,800 residents and, when necessary, transporting them 162 miles north to the nearest major trauma center, in Billings, Mont.  In May, though, the volunteer Washakie County Ambulance Service will be no more.  ''It's just steadily going downhill,'' Mr. Sypherd said. The work is hard, demanding and almost entirely volunteer-based, and the meager revenue from bringing patients in small cities like Worland to medical centers was steeply eroded during much of 2020 when all but the sickest coronavirus patients avoided hospitals.  Washakie County's conundrum is reflective of a troubling trend in Wyoming and states like it: The ambulance crews that service much of rural America have run out of money and volunteers, a crisis exacerbated by the demands of the pandemic and a neglected, patchwork 911 system. The problem transcends geography: In rural, upstate New York, crews are struggling to pay bills. In Wisconsin, older volunteers are retiring, and no one is taking their place.  The situation is particularly acute in Wyoming, where nearly half of the population lives in territory so empty it is still considered the frontier. At least 10 localities in the state are in danger of losing ambulance service, some imminently, according to an analysis reviewed by The new_york_times.  Many of the disappearing ambulances are staffed by volunteers, and some are for-profit ambulance providers that say they are losing money. Still others are local contractors hired by municipalities that, strained by the budget crisis of the pandemic, can no longer afford to pay them. Thousands of Wyoming residents could soon be in a position where there is no one nearby to answer a call for help.  ''Nobody can figure out a solution,'' said Andy Gienapp, the recent administrator for emergency medical services at the Wyoming Department of Health. ''Communities are faced with confronting the very real crisis of, 'We don't know how we're going to do this tomorrow, because nobody's doing it for free.'''  'Nobody wants to pay for it'  About 230 miles southwest of Washakie County, Ron Gatti is preparing to close up Sweetwater Medics, a small ambulance provider in Sweetwater County, where 42,000 people are spread across 10,000 square miles. Facing a budget crisis, the county is expected to end its contract with Mr. Gatti's ambulance service in June.  The situation is a direct result of the pandemic, Mr. Gatti and county officials said. Rock Springs, the town that Sweetwater Medics serves, was looking for budget cuts; the ambulance contract was one of them. Mr. Gatti's company proposed transitioning to a public, tax-supported service, funded by the county, he said, but the money was not there.  ''Everybody wants it and nobody wants to pay for it,'' said Jeff Smith, a commissioner in Sweetwater County.  Instead, after June 30, the regional hospital will have to respond on its own to emergency calls.  Mr. Sypherd, who is also president of the Wyoming E.M.S. Association, keeps a list in his head of ambulance companies, large and small, in imminent danger of closing. There is Sweetwater Medics, which could be gone by autumn. Sublette County's service was recently saved after voters approved a small tax increase, which will fund a new hospital and the affiliated ambulance. Albin, near Laramie, no longer has enough volunteers to fill its crew.  ''The ambulance at Albin is fiscally healthy. There's just nobody to give it to,'' said Carrie Deselms, who helps direct the program.  Fremont County, home to the state's Wind River Indian Reservation, is set to lose its only ambulance service, American Medical Response, a national for-profit company that merged recently with the company that has handled the county's ambulance service since 2016.  Now, American Medical Response says its profit margins cannot justify remaining there. The company has informed county officials that it will not rebid when its contract runs out this summer.  ''The call volume in Fremont County plummeted, making it impossible to cover increasing operational costs without a subsidy'' said Randy Lyman, the Northwest regional president for Global Medical Response, the parent company of American Medical Response. ''The revenue alone simply wasn't sufficient.''  An unsustainable model, strained further  There is a misconception, fueled by stories of astronomical bills and post facto charges, that ambulance service is a sustainable -- even lucrative -- business model. The truth, medical professionals say, is that those bills are rarely paid in full, by Medicare, private insurance or otherwise. Even in New York City, which operates ambulance services alongside its Fire Department, ambulances do not make enough money on their own to survive.  ''Revenue does not come close to covering the full cost of operating E.M.S.,'' said Frank Dwyer, a Fire Department spokesman.  For years, paramedics and emergency technicians have warned that these unreliable revenue streams put the country's emergency medical systems in danger of collapse. The current crisis in rural service, experts say, was almost certain to arrive at some point, but the pandemic expedited it.  ''It is a universal issue,'' said Tristan North, a senior vice president with the American Ambulance Association, which represents crews in rural and urban areas. ''If you have a pretty steady volume, then you can get some efficiencies of scale and have a better idea as far as budgeting, whereas in a rural area, it's far less predictable because you have a smaller population.''  Critical to an ambulance's survival is its ability to transport patients to hospitals, which allows it to bill for a transport. That limited revenue stream dried up during the pandemic, according to workers across the country, when crews were discouraged from transporting all but the sickest of patients.  Instead of transporting patients to hospitals, crews were being directed to provide care on scene, Mr. Gienapp, of the Wyoming health department, said. ''E.M.S. doesn't get paid for any of that,'' he said.  At the same time, many of the standard sorts of medical emergencies that helped keep ambulances afloat disappeared, either because people were moving around less, or were fearful of going to a hospital and exposing themselves to the coronavirus.  ''There is not sufficient E.M.S. volume in this entire service area to make this a profitable, break-even venture,'' Mr. Gatti, of Rock Springs, said. ''This is an essential service that doesn't pay for itself.''  In dense urban areas like New York or Los Angeles, there are enough people and everyday maladies that an ambulance service can come closer to sustaining itself, and enough of a tax base that cities can support it. But in places like Wyoming, the least populous state and one notoriously averse to tax increases, each missed transport in 2020 was critically lost revenue.  Unlike fire and police departments, many states do not consider ambulances to be ''essential services.'' Only a handful of states require local governments to provide them.  For most of the country, access to an ambulance is a lottery. Some municipalities provide them as a public service, funded by taxpayers, while some contract with for-profit ambulance companies. Most rely on the willingness of volunteer companies, like Mr. Sypherd's in Washakie County, which are buoyed by a patchwork system of public and private funding streams.  But across the country, E.M.S. professionals say fewer and fewer people are willing to volunteer for the job, a phenomenon accelerated by the stress of the pandemic. Many municipalities expect volunteers to take time away from work, something few people can now afford to do.  ''The donated labor is not there anymore,'' Mr. Gienapp said.  Same job, new patch  On May 1, Mr. Sypherd will put on a new uniform.  For more than a year, he had known Washakie County's system was unsustainable. In an effort to ensure an ambulance remained in Worland, Mr. Sypherd reached out to Cody Regional Health, a hospital system based near Yellowstone National Park, and began exploring whether the agency would take over his ambulance company.  It is a trend that is gaining traction in rural states like Wyoming: In the absence of volunteer ambulance crews or sustainable funding from local governments, some struggling ambulance services are accepting takeovers from local hospitals and health care systems.  The system is not ideal, experts acknowledge, and it could leave large swaths of rural America disconcertingly far from ambulance service. Still, faced with the alternative, many crews like Mr. Sypherd's are grudgingly accepting the help. In May, Washakie County Ambulance Service will become a Cody Regional Health ambulance company, and will keep many of Mr. Sypherd's original crew on staff.  ''It's the right thing to do,'' said Phillip Franklin, the director of Cody Regional Health's ambulance program.  So far, Mr. Franklin and his team have taken over two struggling ambulance companies in northwest Wyoming, and they are trying to help others with their workload.  The reality, he says, is that without help from systems like Cody's, many of the ambulances in rural Wyoming will fail.  ''Someone is always going to have to subsidize rural America,'' he said.  Strained by pandemic-era budget cuts, stress and a lack of revenue, at least 10 ambulance companies in Wyoming are in danger of shuttering -- some immi- nently. Stephanie Bartlett, top left, and Cheryl Rixey work with Sweetwater Medics, a small ambulance provider in Rock Springs. So does Matt Brady, above left. Ron Gatti, above right, the director of the ambulance service, said Sweetwater County is expected to end its contract with the provider in June.; Rock Springs, Wyo. After June 30, the regional hospital will have to respond on its own to emergency calls. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KIM RAFF FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00045 "
94		"   SPORTS OF THE TIMES  A Guilty Verdict, but the Trials Are Far From Over at Minneapolis North  By Kurt Streeter  1,204 words 26 April 2021   1     Charles Adams, a former police officer, and the Minneapolis North team are warily moving forward after the Derek Chauvin verdict offered a rebuke to one police killing in their community.  Third-degree murder. Guilty.  Second-degree murder. Guilty.  Second-degree manslaughter. Guilty.  As he heard a judge hand down verdicts at the Derek Chauvin murder trial last week, Charles Adams, a high school football coach and former Minneapolis cop, did not celebrate. There is no reviving George Floyd, Chauvin's victim, and much to change in the culture of law enforcement.  Adams couldn't stop thinking and worrying about his team, the Polars of Minneapolis North.  ''The streets of my city don't need more unrest,'' he recalled thinking, as we spoke last week. ''And my players, they don't need more violence. What they need is relief from all the pressure they are constantly under.''  Adams, 40, has a unique view of that pressure.  Known as a pillar of the city's economically depressed, predominantly Black north side, he is one of Minnesota's best high school football coaches, responsible for turning a moribund team into a perennial power and state champion.  He also served 20 years on the Minneapolis police force, a Black cop working the neighborhoods in which he was raised and following the footsteps of his father, a precinct chief who has served nearly four decades on the M.P.D.  Just like his father, Adams made it a point to work with residents instead of lording power over them. As I chronicled in a column last October, he has always been focused on helping his community's youth.  ''With the verdicts done, people need to know what it's been like for kids who've grown up in this city like the players on my team,'' he said. ''They've lived through so much trauma.''  And not just over the past year of the coronavirus pandemic. Adams said all of his players were well aware of the long string of deadly police shootings of Black men that have racked Minneapolis throughout their adolescence, even beyond Floyd in 2020.  There was Jamar Clark, shot to death by the police blocks from Minneapolis North in 2015.  And Philando Castile, shot to death by the police in a nearby suburb in 2016.  And Daunte Wright, shot to death this month by a suburban police officer who is said to have thought her gun was a Taser.  Those killings and the long history of tension between law enforcement and Minneapolis's Black community have given the Polars an understandable wariness of the police. The team's tight bond with Adams and his assistant coaches, many of whom are Black police officers, allows the players to heed their coaches' advice on how to act when confronted by cops.  ''For us, it's kind of like we are always in a pickle,'' Tae-Zhan Gilchrist, 17, an offensive lineman on the team, said when we spoke after the Chauvin trial. ''We got to watch out for the crime in our neighborhood but avoid the police, too. Everywhere you go, there is always this tension. Even though you might be smiling and having a good time, danger and worry are always in the back of your head.''  Gilchrist paused.  ''It's heartbreaking,'' he said, ''but it is life. There are certain things in life you can't avoid.''  Every player I've talked to from Minneapolis North's football team over the last year has expressed similar sentiments.  The players also told me how their team has been a refuge.  ''The way the coaches care about us and understand what we're going through, being with the team is like therapy for us,'' said Azrie Yeager, 15, a freshman who plays on the offensive line. ''After a long day of hearing about all the troubles, it's been great to know that there's a place where I can open up. It just clears the mind.''  When I spoke to the team last October, it was early in a season truncated by the pandemic. North had been favored to make it to the state small school championship game for the second year in a row. It finished with a 6-1 record and a section title, but high school officials canceled the state tournament, cutting off any championship run.  Adams and his team didn't complain about the decision, though. At least they'd had a football season. Through fall and winter, Minneapolis North held classes virtually. Businesses and community centers closed. In the aftermath of Floyd's murder, with so much of life shut down and so much despair and tension in the air, violence spiked. It touched the team in a searing way: A player from the 2016 state champion team came home from college and was shot to death near the high school.  The players needed an outlet. For many of them, football was the only option.  ''Where would we have been without football this year?'' Adams wondered aloud as we spoke. ''In serious trouble. We needed it this year more than ever.''  He needed the ballast as much as his players did. After 20 years, Adams left the M.P.D. last October for a better-paying job as director of security for the Minnesota Twins. He wouldn't have taken the position if the Twins had said he would not be given the time to keep coaching North.  Being a Minneapolis police officer is still deep in his bones, though. Adams said that as the Chauvin trial wore on and the verdict neared, it was hard for him to let go of the fear that if Chauvin received anything less than guilty on all charges destructive protests would again occur.  Adams shuddered at the memory of the night last year, not long after Floyd's murder, when protest raged in Minneapolis, and he dressed in riot gear to head to the front lines.  That evening he spoke to his players over videoconference to tell them he loved them and that he wasn't sure he'd live through the night to see them again.  The memory, he said, caused something akin to post-traumatic stress disorder.  Deep pain. The coach knows what that's like.  So do his players.  With the Chauvin trial over, Adams and his team are warily moving forward.  ''There's still so much to be done and we have to continue to be aware and fight for our rights,'' Gilchrist said. ''The trial is over, but every morning here you still wake up and wonder, 'What terrible thing is going to happen next?'''  Coach Charles Adams, second from left, said football was needed ''this year more than ever.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY TIM GRUBER FOR THE new_york_times) (D1); Minneapolis North finished with a 6-1 record in 2020, but the state tournament was canceled. Their coach, Charles Adams, top right, is a former police officer, following his father, bottom right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TIM GRUBER FOR THE new_york_times; ANDREA ELLEN REED FOR THE new_york_times) (D6)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0004e "
95		"    Here to Help; Vanessa Friedman Answers Your Style Questions  By Vanessa Friedman  500 words 26 April 2021   3     I was recently promoted at an artistic nonprofit. Though people in senior positions dress a bit more formally, I've slid into leggings and an oversize shirt/dress/tunic as my typical wardrobe based almost exclusively on comfort. Now that I have a senior position and a bigger salary, I want an updated look, but I don't want to come across as inauthentic. How do I do this without seeming as if I've gotten too big for my britches?  Patricia, Williamstown, Mass.  Congratulations! The good news is you are not alone in having to figure out how to communicate the new you upon a return to the office.  The first thing to consider is what you want to convey; what subconscious levers you are trying to push. Generally, if the idea is to communicate authority and confidence as well as creativity (qualities that make your team feel secure in your leadership), the single most important message in any item of dress is mindfulness. That means no wrinkles, dangly threads, moth holes or stains, and no clothes that require constant fiddling.  But that does not mean clothes with no personality.  The other good news is that any past allegiance to the idea that a more senior job necessarily means dressing in a more ''serious'' or besuited way has increasingly lost its cred. Women like Marissa Mayer and Mellody Hobson, with their clear love of fashion and femininity and their whip-smart minds, have pretty much put an end to that shibboleth. And after a year in sweatpants, almost anything qualifies as dressing up.  To that end, rather than ''dress for the job you want,'' you should ''dress like the person you admire.'' And when it comes to trailblazers in your field, you may think, for example, of Thelma Golden, the director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, who has a singular and striking personal style. Though she almost entirely wears pieces by her husband, the designer Duro Olowu, and his work would be out of reach for many, you can take a cue from the way his designs mix prints and colors all within simple, easy silhouettes.  Then, rather than think about a wholesale wardrobe reinvention, think about a few key pieces you can incorporate. Add a patterned wrap dress or a shirtdress, either of which you could wear on its own or layer atop leggings or pants. Choose a graphic jacket, which can provide a striking accent, or play with clashing stripes. And consider the jumpsuit, which combines tailoring and comfort.  After all, there's a lot that can be done within a very basic canvas.  Every week in the Open Thread newsletter -- a look from across The Times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share -- The Times's chief fashion critic, Vanessa Friedman, answers a reader's fashion-related question. Sign up for Open Thread at nytimes.com/newsletters.  Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00048 "
96		"    Learning Caution From a Late Columnist  By Charles M. Blow  939 words 26 April 2021   20     There have been many columnists for The new_york_times, many of whom I have only heard or read about, some legendary in their skill and influence.  One of those who came before me was a man named Thomas Wicker, a Southerner like myself. He'd been the lone Times reporter accompanying President John F. Kennedy on a trip to Dallas, and dictated the details of the assassination from a phone booth. Wicker, who wrote under the byline Tom Wicker, went on to inherit the column of the retiring Arthur Krock, whom The Times called ''the dean of Washington pundits, who had covered every president since Calvin Coolidge.''  In 1965, The Voting Rights Act, one of the seminal pieces of civil rights legislation in the history of this country, was signed into law. Soon after, in August of that year, Wicker penned a most prescient column, one I have recalled often, which contained some wise caution, but also some naïve optimism.  In it he wrote:  ''But since at best the Negroes can make themselves no more than a minority of the Southern electorate, Democratic leaders here are apprehensive on two counts. The least likely is the possibility that the Republican Party, newly resurgent in the South, might seek to isolate Negroes in a hapless Democratic Party and turn itself into a larger white man's party.''  But that is precisely what the Republican Party has done, particularly in the South.  Wicker didn't believe that this would happen, in part because white Southerners also approved and benefited from ''the Democratic approach to welfare and economic problems.'' In his estimation: ''Where the pocketbook collides with the race issue, the pocketbook usually wins.''  Wrong again. History has shown us over and over that white racists will consistently vote and act against their own interest so as to oppose or deny Black people. As Heather McGhee so brilliantly argues in her most recent book, ''The Sum of Us,'' they will drain the pool rather than share it with Black people.  When slavery was ended in this country, it would have been smart for poor whites and Blacks to make common cause because they had common economic interests. America -- and Western culture -- taught white people that there was intrinsic value to whiteness, even if you were poor, that it was a racial Rolex that could always be bartered.  So, the preservation of whiteness is a driving force of the racists' political prerogative, even if they are working class, struggling or poor. As Walter Johnson wrote in the Boston Review in 2018, ''The history of white working-class struggle, for example, cannot be understood separate from the privileges of whiteness.''  And Wicker continued in his 1965 column:  ''Perhaps more immediate is the fear that Negroes will go into the Democratic Party in great numbers but become a sort of outcast 'bullet vote' -- with whites automatically lining up against Negroes in primaries, outvoting them consistently, and thus keeping racist politics alive.''  Instead of this, white racists simply left the Democratic Party for the Republican one, and kept ''racist politics alive'' there.  As Wicker put it, ''Racist politics, in the final analysis, depends on exclusion of Negroes from voting.'' As he summarized:  ''The disenfranchisement of Southern Negroes in this century resulted directly from the corrupt and violent competition of Southern Bourbons and Southern agrarians for the Negro vote in the late 19th century. Fearing the Negro would tip the balance against them, the Bourbons raised the flag of white supremacy and aroused the poor-white agrarians against the Negro; Bourbons and agrarians then combined in the name of white solidarity to eliminate the Negro from the electorate as if he did not exist.''  Now you see establishment Republicans joining together to do the very same thing with a wave of voter suppression bills across the country.  And this is not just the work of politicians: A majority of Republican voters are also in favor of many of these voter restrictions that would disproportionately affect Black people. According to a Pew Research Center report issued Thursday, a majority of Republicans and Republican-leaning voters now oppose the automatic registration of all eligible citizens to vote and support more voter identification laws and purging voter lists of voters who haven't recently voted or confirmed their registration.  Wicker ended on a note of optimism, that there would eventually be ''white competition to win the Negro vote,'' and ''if so, the competition surely will mean a new volatility in Southern politics and society, a new freedom for the white politician to move beyond race to the broader issues of national life, and a new opportunity for the Negro to have his needs considered instead of his skin.''  That day never came.  In the moment, Wicker's optimism was understandable. As columnists, we exist and write in the moment, trying our best to view events in context. But, sometimes, too often, we misjudge the meaning of events unfolding around us.  One thing this column by Wicker has taught us was this: no matter how hopeful the moment, no matter how great the advance, never -- ever -- underestimate white supremacy.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY George Tames/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003f "
97		"    Build My Smartphone To Last  By Damon Beres  960 words 26 April 2021   21     A movement is underway to slow the obsolescence of our electronic gear.  Years from now, what creature will digest the new iPads and AirTags that Apple announced on Tuesday? What soil will absorb their metals?  The shiny gadgets of today will be waste tomorrow. As you eye that upgraded tablet, consider that Apple shipped so many new iPads last year that if they were all laid flat and stacked, they would be about as tall as 862 Empire State Buildings. Then think about whatever old iPad of yours is languishing now in some unknown place.  Manufacturers don't talk much about this turnover when they announce the big new thing that will replace your mostly just as good old thing. This is all by design. There's a term for it: planned obsolescence, or designing a product with an intentionally limited life span. Ever try to get your TV repaired?  Apple, Samsung, Sony and other manufacturers of high-tech electronics release waves of new hardware every year even as the tide of screens and circuitry is engulfing us in discarded devices.  Now there is a movement afoot to change that approach.  This year, the French government began requiring tech manufacturers to list an ''indice de réparabilité,'' a repairability score, on product pages for items like the iPhone and MacBook. If a device can be repaired, then its life can be extended, saving consumers money and the planet the burden of so many trashed gadgets. None of Apple's iPhones or MacBooks earned above a 7, with 10 being the top score -- making the company a ''C student at best,'' the website Grist noted. Other manufacturers like Microsoft and Samsung fared about the same. Equipped with this knowledge, consumers can make better choices about which products to buy. If unrepairable gadgets don't sell, manufacturers will change course.  Some 59 million tons of old TVs, computer, screens, smartphones, washers and other electronics are discarded every year. This waste is dangerous. Batteries explode in recycling facilities. Toxic substances like mercury leach into soil and groundwater and disperse in the air. Manufacturing flat screens adds greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. We need tech companies like Apple -- so progressive in so many ways -- to lead the charge to solve this problem. If they won't, governments must make them.  France is not alone in stepping into this mess. The movement is in the United States as well. More than a dozen states are considering so-called right-to-repair legislation, a rare bipartisan concern centered on the idea that manufacturers should not restrict access to information and parts that would allow independent shops to fix busted gadgets.  The New York State Assemblymember Patricia Fahy will hold a virtual town hall on the topic May 5. Anyone can attend. And the Federal Trade Commission is expected to release a long-delayed report soon on repair restrictions in consumer technology that could set the stage for a bigger push from the Biden administration.  Repairability is a surefire path toward longevity. Items become waste when they are no longer useful. Some of this is the simple march of progress. Other times, it is much harder to see the justification, such as when a Sonos speaker is cut off from software updates seemingly overnight.  Although tech companies will often speak of sustainability, many lobby against repair legislation, fearful it will loosen their control and eat into their profits. This can lead to a sort of cognitive dissonance.  Apple's annual environmental report, published this month, asserts a commitment to device longevity and sustainability. It also speaks of the Apple Pencil stylus as though it contains secrets lost in some fragment of the Rosetta Stone. The company is ''designing, developing and testing additional disassembly tools -- including new methods for recovering materials from Apple Pencil,'' it says, as though the methods could only be reverse-engineered, rather than integrated from the very first stage of design.  There's the issue in a nutshell: Sustainability matters, but marketable design appears to matter more to these companies. Consumers are urged to upgrade their devices annually. Well north of 1 billion smartphones were shipped in 2020 -- and it was a sluggish year because of the Covid-19 pandemic.  Manufacturers must do better. Their devices must be repairable by all and kept compatible with software updates for as long as possible, not artificially obsoleted. Consumers should support right-to-repair legislation. Buy what you please, be it a fancy fridge or a smartphone -- no one is changing the world by holding on to an iPhone 7 for an extra year -- but know to ask three simple questions when you're shopping: ''How long will this last?,'' ''How will I get it fixed when it breaks?'' and ''How will I recycle this when I need a new device?'' Follow through and get the thing fixed or take it to a trustworthy recycler when it's time. (Apple's store employees can help with this step, for instance.)  In this world, damage is a certainty. But we cannot leave things broken: A problem of our creation is a problem that can be fixed.  Damon Beres (@dlberes) is a journalist whose work focuses on the effects of technology on people and the planet. He co-founded the publication OneZero at Medium.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jun Cen FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003d "
98		"    Neighbors Aren't Necessarily Friends  By Maya Phillips  1,141 words 26 April 2021   3     In this clever show, audience members join a ''neighborhood'' and lobby for how its discordant residents should to spend a chunk of community money.  Mister Rogers was wrong: It isn't always a beautiful day in the neighborhood.  Community is tricky, especially when people's definitions of it -- in their families or circle of friends, in their neighborhood, in their nation and beyond -- vary so dramatically. No wonder there's conflict among the residents of Oak Street in ''Block Association Project,'' a new interactive show from the Actors Theater of Louisville that works hard to usher us into its fictional suburb, but struggles to articulate its thoughts on political action and democracy.  Meet your new neighbors: Elena (Ceci Fernández), a self-interested real estate agent; Aneta (Jane Park), a scholar who struggles with social cues; Emma (Anne-Marie Trabolsi), a pedantic uber-liberal student; Beth (Myra Lucretia Taylor), a wholesome peacemaker; Ryan (John McGinty), whose dog is a cause for discussion; George (Nathan Darrow), a cynical writer who doesn't want to be bothered; and Rachel (Lauren Lane), the well-meaning self-appointed leader who wants to keep things light and not get political.  We're all gathered on Zoom to discuss how to spend $10,000 in community funds. Easy enough, right? But a conversation about the practicality of a community garden versus a dog park soon spins off into a debate about what the neighborhood stands for, how inclusive it should be and whose values should be represented.  Written by Michael Yates Crowley and directed by Michael Rau (the founders of Wolf 359, who most recently collaborated on the immersive workplace drama ''Temping,'') for the 2021 Humana Festival of New American Plays, ''Block Association Project'' actually begins before the Zoom meeting, via a series of association emails that the audience can choose to receive in advance. In them, Aneta sends links to articles about dog attacks, Rachel's son, Teo (Joe Montoya), interjects to encourage us to donate to the aid organization Border Angels, and George churlishly asks to be unsubscribed.  It's an inventive approach, and for me, quite a surprise to see threads from the residents of Oak Street among press requests and emails from editors in my inbox. It's not simply the novel nature of the form, however; the emails are a subtle mode of character-building, right down to their signoffs (Elena has a professional signature for her real estate company, while Beth's is a call to ''Think Green''), which made encountering them on Zoom that much more satisfying.  I can't say the same for the full performance, however. Granted, I have never been one for community gatherings, so an experience that strong-arms audiences into interacting isn't my cup of tea -- especially when it's deployed more for novelty than narrative development.  So when discussions fell apart in the meeting, the performers turned to the audience, dividing us into breakout rooms where they moderated short (about six minutes each) debates about the topics on the table, including the association's leadership and whose votes should be represented. Intermittently we were also asked to participate in Zoom polls, all to foster our investment in this fictional neighborhood.  At times these felt like a schoolteacher's last-ditch attempts to get her class more engaged, when they seemed positioned to act like an urgent call for political involvement -- perhaps even an indictment of those who wish to be quiet when urgent action is required.  However, the 90-minute show struggled to balance audience participation with its scripted characters and themes. The antisocial writer and the self-serving real estate agent, among the others, feel like no more than petty character types. Almost every character has a breakout moment -- a turn in the conversation that leads to a reveal, like Ryan's story about how he got possession of his father's dog, and Aneta's account of her family's treacherous immigration journey -- that is meant to give us something hearty to chew on.  The performers labor through those emotional spotlights; Taylor and Lane are amiable but flat, and Trabolsi and Darrow are suitably obnoxious but wholly unsurprising. (Props, though, to the show for being accessible in a way many aren't, using multiple American Sign Language interpreters, directed by Alexandria Wailes.)  Caught in the muddle of the script are references to the crisis at the U.S. border with Mexico, a debate on the definition of ''refugee'' and allusions to common hindrances to a working democracy -- there's even a protest of an election result, and a motion to secede. The play uses its small-town community affairs to nod toward the capital-P Politics of our nation right now, but just like Rachel, it's hesitant to get into specifics and confront the viewpoints and practices that have bolstered our divisive, inequitable body politic.  Then again, the show did mint some stars: audience members who turned out to be terrific at improvising on the topics at hand.  In my group a couple with a new puppy named Sato were vocal about what they thought community meant and how they thought the Block Association should work. And a woman named Jane, who spoke eloquently about the difference between leading and facilitating, was enthusiastically nominated by my group to be the new head of the Block Association and successfully voted in.  Unfortunately, the last several minutes of ''Block Association Project'' unraveled into what I'll call a final act phantasmagoria -- a move I've seen in many shows that aim to break from reality via a poetic unpacking of themes that were never fully tackled.  Such purposefully jarring flights of fancy can actually drag a production down, like a cruise ship anchor yanking on a sailboat. In ''Block Association Project'' it's a character's soul-searching monologue (which features both Drake and an Aztec god, by the way) that goes on way too long.  Were I to vote on a future for ''Block Association Project,'' I would urge more precision and a more confident marriage between this community's banal civics and campaigns with the current troubles of American society. After all, these are the kinds of discussions we're all now used to having. But, moving on: What's the next item on the agenda?  Block Association Project  Through May 1; actorstheatre.org  Block Association Project Through Saturday; actorstheatre.org.  Top, Nathan Darrow in the Zoom show ''Block Association Project.'' Above, clockwise from top left: Amber Marince, Lauren Lane, Cathleen Riddley, John McGinty, Myra Lucretia Taylor and Ceci Fernández in the performance. Below, an image from a presentation that is part of this new, 90-minute show. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SHEYENNE SANTIAGO/ACTORS THEATER OF LOUISVILLE; BLOCK ASSOCIATION)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003e "
99		"    A Chinese Champion Loses to an American  By Amy Qin  1,154 words 26 April 2021   6     The American took Zhang down in Jacksonville, Fla., in less than 90 seconds. Kamaru Usman retained his welterweight title against Jorge Masvidal.  Rose Namajunas knocked out Zhang Weili to recapture the Ultimate Fighting Championship women's strawweight title on Saturday night in Jacksonville, Fla., during what was billed as the first full-capacity sporting event held indoors in the United States in more than a year.  Around 15,000 mostly unmasked spectators were in the VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena to watch the bout, in which Namajunas took Zhang down with a left head kick just 1 minute 18 seconds into the opening round. Namajunas first won the title in 2017 when she knocked out the then-undefeated champion Joanna Jedrzejczyk in New York to win the 115-pound belt. Namajunas is the first woman in U.F.C. history to regain her title, the company said.  ''I did it again,'' Namajunas, 28, nicknamed Thug, said through tears after her victory on Saturday. ''I am the best.''  The bout was one of three title fights on the U.F.C. 261 card on Saturday. Kamaru Usman successfully defended his welterweight title, cutting Jorge Masvidal down with a hard right hand jab in the second round. It was the second time in two years that the 170-pound champion, known as the Nigerian Nightmare, had beaten Masvidal, further cementing his legacy as one of the best welterweights in the history of the sport. The victory extended Usman's UF.C. win streak to 14, now the longest among active U.F.C. fighters.  ''Jacksonville, Florida -- y'all said you wanted violence?'' Usman, 33, said to the crowd after the fight. ''You're welcome.''  Valentina Shevchenko retained her women's flyweight title in a dominant performance against Jessica Andrade, landing seven takedowns before finishing the Brazilian fighter off just over halfway through the second round.  After the fight, the 125-pound Shevchenko told the crowd -- and future opponents -- not to bother looking for a weakness in her game.  ''Don't waste your time,'' Shevchenko, 33, said. ''There isn't one.''  Zhang, of China, had been the favorite among bettors heading into Saturday night's showdown. Although Namajunas is seen as a more precise, technically skilled fighter, Zhang is known for her strong kickboxing skills and sheer physicality, the product of a strict conditioning regimen. Zhang, who lost her debut professional fight in 2013, captured the U.F.C. strawweight title in 2019 with a stunning knockout win against Andrade.  In her last bout, in March 2020, she successfully defended her title in a brutal five-round battle against Jedrzejczyk that was widely seen by U.F.C. fans as the fight of the year. After that victory, Zhang, 30, the daughter of a coal worker, became a symbol of women's rights and a national hero in her home country, with the state-run news media hailing her as ''the most capable female fighter in China'' and the ''woman warrior of the East.''  Namajunas, who is Lithuanian-American, recently stirred controversy by framing the fight with Zhang as an ideological contest between freedom and Communism. ''Better dead than red,'' Namajunas said at one point, using a McCarthy era anti-Communist slogan. She later walked back her comments, saying she had never meant to personally disrespect Zhang.  As the bout got underway on Saturday, the two fighters exchanged several kicks and jabs before Namajunas dropped Zhang to the mat with a left head kick. Namajunas then jumped on Zhang and started pummeling her with right hammerfists before a referee jumped in to declare a knockout victory. The loss ended Zhang's 21-fight career win streak.  Immediately afterward, Zhang voiced frustration with the call, saying she thought it had been made too soon. Among commentators, though, and even among Zhang's fans on Chinese social media, most agreed that it had been the right call.  Zhang later congratulated Namajunas in a post on Weibo, the Chinese social media platform.  ''Only by defeating a great champion can I become a legend, and only by defeating a legend, can I become a new person,'' she wrote. ''Before, I aimed to win the U.F.C. championship, but now I have a higher goal than the championship.''  ''I hope U.F.C. can arrange a second fight as soon as possible,'' she added.  Dana White, the U.F.C. president, also teased the possibility of a rematch.  ''Obviously, the rematch -- that's a fun fight,'' White told reporters at a media briefing after the event. ''I think a lot of people would be excited about that fight.''  Such a rematch would draw great interest in China, where the U.F.C. has been actively expanding its presence.  In recent years, the company has signed 14 Chinese fighters and several major partnerships with Chinese companies and organizations, including a deal with the Chinese Olympic Committee to help train the country's athletes for the upcoming Summer Games in Tokyo and the Winter Games in Beijing next year. Much of that training is taking place at a $13 million training facility in Shanghai that the U.F.C. unveiled in 2019.  The heavy promotion for Saturday's event appeared to have paid off in China. Zhang's fight was among the top trending topics on Weibo. After the fight, the platform saw an outpouring of support for Zhang, along with many calls for a rematch.  ''We are all rooting for your comeback,'' one user wrote in a message that was liked more than 4,000 times. ''Fight on!''  The event on Saturday opened with two bouts that ended in TKOs due to stoppage. In the first bout, Anthony Smith defeated Jimmy Crute in the first round with a crushing kick to the back of Crute's knee that appeared to turn his leg into jelly.  The second bout took even less time. Chris Weidman's leg cracked in half as he opened the fight with a leg kick to Uriah Hall's knee, in what some described as among the most gruesome injuries in U.F.C. history. Weidman was taken out of the octagon on a stretcher to applause from the stunned crowd. White tweeted that Hall was the first fighter in U.F.C. history to win without a single strike having been thrown.  ''I hope he's OK. I wish his family well,'' Hall said after the fight, in an interview that was widely praised on social media. ''Whatever rank I am in the future, if he gets well, I owe him this fight and I hope he can come back from it -- you're still one of the best, Chris.''  Rose Namajunas after defeat- ing Zhang Weili as part of U.F.C. 261 on Saturday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASEN VINLOVE/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00040 "
100		"    Conspiracy Theorists Cavort In Messy Recount in Arizona  By Michael Wines  1,846 words 26 April 2021   1     An audit of the vote in Arizona's most populous county was meant to mollify angry Trump voters. But it is being criticized as a partisan exercise more than a fact-finding one.  PHOENIX -- It seemed so simple back in December.  Responding to angry voters who echoed former President Donald J. Trump's false claims of a stolen election, Arizona Republicans promised a detailed review of the vote that showed Mr. Trump to have been the first Republican presidential nominee to lose the state since 1996. ''We hold an audit,'' State Senator Eddie Farnsworth said at a Judiciary Committee hearing. ''And then we can put this to rest.''  But when a parade of flatbed trucks last week hauled boxes of voting equipment and 78 pallets containing the 2.1 million ballots of Arizona's largest county to a decrepit local coliseum, it kicked off a seat-of-the-pants audit process that seemed more likely to amplify Republican grievances than to put them to rest.  Almost half a year after the election Mr. Trump lost, the promised audit has become a snipe hunt for skulduggery that has spanned a court battle, death threats and calls to arrest the elected leadership of Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix.  The head of Cyber Ninjas, the Florida-based firm that Republican senators hired to oversee the audit, has embraced Mr. Trump's baseless theories of election theft and has suggested, contrary to available evidence, that Mr. Trump actually won Arizona by 200,000 votes. The pro-Trump cable channel One America News Network has started a fund-raiser to finance the venture and has been named one of the nonpartisan observers that will keep the audit on the straight and narrow.  In fact, three previous reviews showed no sign of significant fraud or any reason to doubt President Biden's victory. But the senators now plan to recount -- by hand -- all 2.1 million ballots cast in Maricopa County, two-thirds of the entire vote statewide.  Critics in both parties charge that an effort that began as a way to placate angry Trump voters has become a political embarrassment and another blow to the once-inviolable democratic norm that losers and winners alike honor the results of elections.  ''You know the dog that caught the car?'' said Steve Gallardo, the lone Democrat on the Republican-dominated Maricopa Board of Supervisors. ''The dog doesn't know what to do with it.''  After a brief pause on Friday ordered by a state court judge, the audit continues without clarity on who will do the counting, what it will cost and who will pay for the process, which is expected to last into mid-May. The One America network is livestreaming it, and Mr. Trump is cheering from the sidelines.  In an email statement on Saturday, he praised the ''brave American Patriots'' behind the effort and demanded that Gov. Doug Ducey, a frequent target of his displeasure, dispatch the state police or National Guard for their protection.  Katie Hobbs, Arizona's secretary of state, a Democrat, was less enthused.  ''My concern grows deeper by the hour,'' she said in an email on Friday. ''It is clear that no one involved in this process knows what they are doing, and they are making it up as they go along.''  The Senate president, Karen Fann, said in December that the audit had no hidden agenda and could not change the settled election results in Arizona, regardless of what it showed.  ''A lot of our constituents have a lot of questions about how the voting, the electoral system works, the security of it, the validity of it,'' she said, and so the senators needed experts to examine voting processes and determine ''what else could we do to verify the votes were correct and accurate.''  Other state legislatures have looked into bogus claims of election fraud. But the Arizona audit, driven in part by conspiracy theories about rigged voting machines, is in a league of its own. Experts say it underscores the sharp rightward shift of the Legislature and the state Republican Party even as the state edges toward the political center.  ''I get why they're doing it, because half of the G.O.P. believes there was widespread fraud,'' said Mike Noble, a Phoenix pollster who got his start in Republican politics. ''The only problem is, a majority of the electorate doesn't believe there was widespread fraud.  ''The longer they push this,'' he said, ''the more they're alienating people in the middle.''  In Arizona, the state party is headed by Kelli Ward, a former state senator who has rejected Mr. Biden's victory and supports the audit. Under her leadership, the party in January censured Mr. Ducey, former Senator Jeff Flake and Cindy McCain for being insufficiently loyal to Mr. Trump.  The 16 Republicans in the State Senate reflect the party's lurch to the right. November's elections ousted the Senate's two most moderate Republicans, replacing one with a Democrat and another with a Republican who claims lifetime membership in the Oath Keepers, the extremist group that helped lead the assault on the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6.  Another self-proclaimed Oath Keeper, State Representative Mark Finchem, proposed in January to give the Legislature the power to reject presidential election results and choose new electors by a majority vote. (The proposal went nowhere). Mr. Finchem since has become a vocal backer of the audit.  ''The people in the Legislature are more prone to believe in the conspiracy theories and are more prone to espouse them'' than in the past, said Barrett Marson, a Phoenix campaign consultant and a former Republican spokesman for the Arizona State House.  Ms. Fann, Mr. Farnsworth and Mr. Finchem did not respond to requests for interviews.  The Senate's rightward drift is simply explained, political analysts say. Most of the 30 Senate districts are so uncompetitive that the Democratic and Republican primaries effectively choose who will serve as senators. Because most voters sit out primary elections, the ones who do show up -- for Republicans, that often means far-right Trump supporters -- are the key to getting elected.  Responding to stolen-election claims, through tougher voting laws or inquiries, is by far those voters' top issue, said Chuck Coughlin, a Republican campaign strategist in Phoenix.  ''They're representing their constituency,'' he said. ''The whole process was built to produce this.''  The senators warmed to the notion of a Maricopa County audit from the first mention of it in early December.  Before long, they sent subpoenas to the county seeking the 2.1 million ballots, access to 385 voting machines and other equipment like check-in poll books, voting machine passwords and personal details on everyone who voted. The supervisors resisted, calling the election fraud-free, and said they wanted a court ruling on the subpoenas' legality.  The reaction was immediate: The four Republicans and one Democrat on the Board of Supervisors were deluged with thousands of telephone calls and emails from Trump supporters, many from out of state, some promising violence.  ''All five supervisors were receiving death threats,'' said Mr. Gallardo, the Democratic supervisor. Two police officers were posted outside his home.  Hoping to head off a dispute, the supervisors hired two federally approved firms to conduct a forensic audit of the county's voting machines. The audit concluded that the equipment had performed flawlessly.  Ms. Fann, who in the past had been seen as a moderate conservative, said the Senate wanted a stricter review. Senators said they had hired ''an independent, qualified forensic auditing firm'' for the task.  Then it developed that their selection, Allied Security Operations Group, had asserted that Arizona voting machines had been hacked in an ''insidious and egregious ploy'' to elect Mr. Biden.  The senators backtracked, but Jack Sellers, the chairman of the Maricopa County supervisors, charged in a Facebook post that they had chosen ''a debunked conspiracy theorist'' for the audit.  Tempers flared, and all 16 Republican senators proposed to hold the supervisors in contempt, potentially sending them to jail.  But that fell apart after Senator Paul Boyer, a Phoenix Republican, backed out after deciding he could not jail the supervisors for disobeying a subpoena they considered illegal.  As he stood on the Senate floor explaining his stance, his cellphone began buzzing with furious texts and emails. Some were threatening; some mentioned his wife's workplace and their toddler son.  ''It was like, 'You'd better watch your back -- we're coming for you,''' Mr. Boyer said. The family spent days in hiding before returning home with a 24-hour police guard.  Just two weeks later, on Feb. 27, a county court ruled the Senate subpoenas legal.  The Senate, seemingly caught unawares, initially refused to accept delivery of the subpoenaed material for lack of a secure place to store it. Officials rented a local coliseum, but the county sheriff's office refused to provide security, calling the job outside its scope.  The second firm hired to analyze the audit results, Cyber Ninjas, says it is an industry leader. But The Arizona Republic soon reported that the company's chief executive, Doug Logan, had posted a litany of stolen-election conspiracy theories on a Twitter account that he had deleted in January.  Among them was a retweeted post suggesting that Dominion Voting Systems, a favorite target of the right, had robbed Mr. Trump of 200,000 votes in Arizona. Dominion says Cyber Ninjas is ''led by conspiracy theorists and QAnon supporters who have helped spread the ''Big Lie'' of a rigged election.  Mr. Logan, at a news conference last week said the company was committed to a fair, transparent process. ''It's really, really important to us that we have integrity in the way we do this count and in the results that come out of it,'' he told reporters.  Ms. Fann has said that the firm and others it will oversee are ''well qualified and well experienced.''  But unease about the audit has continued to mushroom. Ms. Hobbs, the secretary of state, asked the state attorney general, Mark Brnovich, a Republican, to investigate the Senate's handling of the procedure, citing a lack of transparency about security of ballots. She noted that some of the Legislature's furthest-right firebrands have had free access to the coliseum even as it remained unclear whether reporters and impartial election experts would be allowed to observe the proceedings.  He declined.  Greg Burton, the executive editor of The Arizona Republic, said in a statement on Friday that ''Senate leaders have throttled legitimate press access and handed Arizona's votes to conspiracy theorists.''  Amid the growing uproar, the Republican senators who have approved and stood behind the audit since its beginning have largely been silent about concerns over its integrity.  Alain Delaquérière and Susan Beachy contributed research.  Trump supporters outside the office where ballots were being counted in Phoenix on Nov. 6. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADRIANA ZEHBRAUSKAS FOR THE new_york_times) (A13)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003b   "
101		"    U.S. Military Begins Task Of Leaving Afghanistan  By Thomas Gibbons-Neff  711 words 26 April 2021   9     The top American commander, Gen. Austin S. Miller, says he is often asked whether the Afghan forces are ready to fight the Taliban alone. His answer? 'They must be ready.'  KABUL, Afghanistan -- The U.S. military has begun its complete withdrawal from Afghanistan, the top American commander there said Sunday, marking what amounts to the beginning of the end of the United States' nearly 20-year-old war in the country.  ''I now have a set of orders,'' said Gen. Austin S. Miller, the head of the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan, to a news conference of Afghan journalists at the U.S. military's headquarters in Kabul, the capital. ''We will conduct an orderly withdrawal from Afghanistan, and that means transitioning bases and equipment to the Afghan security forces.''  General Miller's remarks come almost two weeks after President Biden announced that all U.S. forces would be out of the country by Sept. 11, the 20th anniversary of the terrorist attacks that propelled the United States into its long war in Afghanistan.  Mr. Biden's announcement was greeted with uncertainty in Afghanistan, as it prepares for a future without a U.S. and NATO military presence despite a Taliban insurgency that seems dead set on a military victory despite talks of peace.  If the Taliban return to power -- either through force or being incorporated into the government -- they are likely to roll back rights for women, as they did during their harsh rule in the late 1990s.  Holding the line for now are the Afghan security forces, which have endured a particularly difficult winter. Taliban offensives in the south and repeated attacks in the north despite the cold weather have meant mounting casualties ahead of what could be a violent summer as U.S. and NATO forces withdraw. Though the Afghan military and police forces together are said to have around 300,000 personnel, the real number is suspected to be much lower.  ''I often get asked how are the security forces? Can the security forces do the work in our absence?'' General Miller said. ''And my message has always been the same: They must be ready.''  General Miller added that ''certain equipment'' must be withdrawn from Afghanistan, ''but wherever possible'' the United States and international forces will leave behind matériel for the Afghan forces.  There are roughly 3,500 U.S. troops in Afghanistan and around 7,000 NATO and allied forces. Those NATO forces will probably withdraw alongside the United States, as many countries in the coalition are dependent on American support.  Atop the international military forces in Afghanistan, there are also roughly 18,000 contractors in the country, almost all of whom will also depart. General Miller said that some of the contracts ''will have to be adjusted'' so that the Afghan security forces, which are heavily dependent on contractor assistance -- especially the Afghan Air Force -- will continue to be supported. The thousands of private contractors in Afghanistan are tasked with a range of jobs, including security, logistics and aircraft maintenance.  Under last year's peace agreement with the Taliban, U.S. and international forces were supposed to withdraw from the country by May 1. Under the agreement the Taliban have refrained -- for the most part -- from attacking U.S. troops. But what remains unclear is if the insurgent group will attack the withdrawing forces following Mr. Biden's decision to set the final deadline later, in September.  ''We have the military means and capability to fully protect our force during retrograde, as well as support the Afghan security forces,'' General Miller said.  American troops are still spread out in a constellation of around a dozen bases, most of which contain small groups of Special Operations forces advising the Afghan military. To cover the withdrawal, the American military has committed a significant amount of air support, including positioning an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf, in case the Taliban decide to attack.  U.S. Army soldiers during training of the 215th Corps of the Afghan National Army at Camp Bastion in Helmand Province, Afghanistan, in 2016. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Adam Ferguson for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003a "
102		"    NASA Mars Helicopter Makes Longest Flight Yet  By Kenneth Chang  606 words 26 April 2021   14     Ingenuity made a 328-foot round-trip journey, helping to demonstrate the capability of the vehicle's navigation system.  NASA's Mars helicopter went up again, going faster and traveling a total distance that was about the length of an American football field on its third trip through the wispy air of Mars.  Like the first two flights, the small experimental flying robot, named Ingenuity, perfectly executed its instructions from Earth. At 1:31 a.m. Eastern time -- 12:33 p.m. local Mars time -- it lifted 16 feet off the ground, then flew a round-trip distance of 328 feet before landing back where it started.  That was about 25 times as far as the second flight flew three days ago. The helicopter reached a top speed of 4.5 miles per hour, and the flight lasted about one minute and 20 seconds.  The flight was a test of the helicopter's navigation system, which visually keeps track of its location by comparing ground features recorded by its onboard camera. The farther it traveled, the more images its camera had to take to remember the landscape below. If it flew too fast, the helicopter could lose track of where it was.  ''This is the first time we've seen the algorithm for the camera running over a long distance,'' MiMi Aung, the helicopter's project manager, said in a NASA news release. ''You can't do this inside a test chamber.''  Ingenuity, about 1.6 feet tall, is an $85 million project to demonstrate that controlled flight, like an airplane or a helicopter, is feasible on Mars, where the atmosphere at the surface is just 1 percent of Earth's.  It was tacked on to Perseverance, NASA's latest Mars rover, which arrived on the red planet in February. Before Perseverance heads off on its main mission -- to seek hints of ancient life in a dried-up river delta -- the Ingenuity team has 30 Martian days, or about 31 Earth days, to complete five test flights of the helicopter.  ''Today's flight was what we planned for, and yet it was nothing short of amazing,'' said Dave Lavery, the helicopter project's program executive. ''With this flight, we are demonstrating critical capabilities that will enable the addition of an aerial dimension to future Mars missions.''  Last Monday, Ingenuity made history as the first powered aircraft to fly on another planet. The first flight was a short one: a simple up-and-down that totaled 39.1 seconds off the ground. The second flight, on Thursday, went a bit higher and made a short lateral move.  With the success of the first three flights, the helicopter's engineers have a bit more than a week to complete the final two, which will further push Ingenuity's capabilities. Ms. Aung, the project's manager, said after the first flight last week that she hoped the final one would travel as far as some 2,300 feet from its starting point.  The fourth flight will take off in a few days, NASA said.  There are currently no plans to put a second helicopter on Mars. But Bob Balaram, the project's chief engineer, said he and his colleagues had begun sketching out designs for a larger Mars helicopter capable of carrying some 10 pounds of science equipment.  NASA's Perseverance rover photographed the experimental helicopter known as Ingenuity during the vehicle's third flight on Mars on Sunday. It is the small black dot near the center of the lower hill. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NASA/JPL-CALTECH)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003q "
103		"    Bottlenecks Hold Up Aid as Renters Fall Behind  By Jason DeParle  1,936 words 26 April 2021   1     Congress allocated $25 billion in December and another $21 billion in March to help people who fell behind on rent during the pandemic. Little has reached landlords or tenants.  WASHINGTON -- Four months after Congress approved tens of billions of dollars in emergency rental aid, only a small portion has reached landlords and tenants, and in many places it is impossible even to file an application.  The program requires hundreds of state and local governments to devise and carry out their own plans, and some have been slow to begin. But the pace is hindered mostly by the sheer complexity of the task: starting a huge pop-up program that reaches millions of tenants, verifies their debts and wins over landlords whose interests are not always the same as their renters'.  The money at stake is vast. Congress approved $25 billion in December and added more than $20 billion in March. The sum the federal government now has for emergency rental aid, $46.5 billion, rivals the annual budget of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.  Experts say careful preparation may improve results; it takes time to find the neediest tenants and ensure payment accuracy. But with 1 in 7 renters reporting that they are behind on payments, the longer it takes to distribute the money, the more landlords suffer destabilizing losses, and tenants risk eviction.  Millions of tenants are protected from eviction only by a tenuous federal moratorium that faces multiple court challenges, omits many households and is scheduled to expire in June.  ''I'm impressed with the amount of work that unsung public servants are doing to set up these programs, but it is problematic that more money isn't getting out the door,'' said Ingrid Gould Ellen, a professor at New York University who is studying the effort. ''There are downstream effects if small landlords can't keep up their buildings, and you want to reach families when they first hit a crisis so their problems don't compound.''  Estimates of unpaid rents vary greatly, from $8 billion to $53 billion, with the sums that Congress has approved at the high end of the range.  The situation illustrates the patchwork nature of the American safety net. Food, cash, health care and other types of aid flow through separate programs. Each has its own mix of federal, state and local control, leading to great geographic variation.  While some pandemic aid has flowed through established programs, the rental help is both decentralized and new, making the variation especially pronounced.  Among those seeking help is Saundra Broughton, 48, a logistics worker outside Charleston, S.C., who considered herself safely middle class in the fall, when she rented an apartment with a fitness center and saltwater pool. To her shock, she was soon laid off; after her jobless benefits were delayed, she received an eviction notice.  ''I've always worked and taken care of myself,'' she said. ''I've never been on public assistance.''  A judge gave Ms. Broughton 10 days to leave her apartment. Only a last-minute call to legal aid brought word of the federal moratorium, which requires tenants to apply. She rushed to the library to print the form with 24 hours to spare. ''But I still owe the money,'' she said, about $4,600 and counting.  If Ms. Broughton lived in nearby Berkeley County, she could have sought help as early as March 29. In Charleston County, a few miles away, she could have applied on April 12. But as a resident of Dorchester County, she must apply through the state, which has $272 million in federal money but is not yet taking applications.  ''Why are they holding the money?'' she said. ''I have thousands of dollars of debt and could be kicked out at any moment. It's a very frightening feeling.''  The huge aid measures passed during the early stages of the pandemic did not include specific provisions to help renters, though they did give most households cash. But hundreds of state and local governments started programs with discretionary money from the CARES Act, passed in March 2020. These efforts disbursed $4.5 billion in what amounted to a practice run for the effort now underway with 10 times the money.  Lessons cited include the need to reach out to the poorest tenants to let them know aid is available. Technology often posed barriers: Renters had to apply online, and many lacked computers or internet access.  The demand for documentation also thwarted aid, as many people without proof of leases or lost income could not finish applications. Some landlords declined to participate, perhaps preferring to seek new tenants.  Despite rising need, programs in Florida and New York, financed by the CARES Act, returned tens of millions of unspent dollars to the states. By the time Congress passed the new program in December, nearly 1 renter household in 5 reported being behind on payments.  The national effort, the Emergency Rental Assistance Program, is run by the Treasury Department. It allocates money to states and also to cities and counties with populations of at least 200,000 that want to run their own programs. About 110 cities and 227 counties have chosen to do so.  The program offers up to 12 months of rent and utilities to low-income tenants economically harmed by the pandemic, with priority on households with less than half the area's median income -- typically about $34,000 a year. Federal law does not deny the aid to undocumented immigrants, though a few states and counties do.  Modern assistance seems to demand a mix of Jacob Riis and Bill Gates -- outreach to the marginalized and help with software. Progress slowed for a month when the Biden administration canceled guidance issued under President Donald J. Trump and developed rules that require less documentation.  Other reasons for slow starts vary. Progressive state legislators in New York spent months debating the best way to protect the neediest tenants. Conservatives legislators in South Carolina were less focused on the issue. But the result was largely the same: Neither legislature passed its program until April, and neither state is yet accepting applications.  ''I just don't know why there hasn't been more of a sense of urgency,'' said Sue Berkowitz, the director of the South Carolina Appleseed Legal Justice Center. ''We've been hearing nonstop from people worried about eviction.''  There is no complete data on how many tenants have been helped. But of the $17.6 billion awarded to state governments, 20 percent is going to states not yet taking applications, though some local programs in those states are. Florida (which has $871 million), Illinois ($566 million) and North Carolina ($547 million) are among those that have yet to start.  ''The pace is slow,'' said Greg Brown of the National Apartment Association, who emphasized that landlords have mortgages, taxes and maintenance to pay.  In a recent talk at the Brookings Institution, Erika Poethig, a housing expert on the White House Domestic Policy Council, praised the ''unprecedented amount of rental assistance'' and said ''the federal government only has so much ability'' to encourage faster action.  Accepting applications is only the beginning. With $1.5 billion to spend, California has attracted 150,000 requests for help. But of the $355 million requested, only $20 million has been approved and $1 million paid.  Texas, with $1.3 billion to spend, started quickly, but the company it hired to run the program had software failures and staffing shortages. A committee in the state House of Representatives found that after 45 days, the program had paid just 250 households.  By contrast, a program jointly run by the city of Houston and Harris County had spent about a quarter of its money and assisted nearly 10,000 households.  Not everyone is troubled by the pace. ''Getting the money out fast isn't necessarily the goal here, especially when we focus on making sure the money reaches the most vulnerable people,'' said Diane Yentel, the director of the National Low Income Housing Coalition.  Given the challenge, she said, ''I think it's going OK.''  She points toward a program in Santa Clara County, Calif., that won praise for its outreach last year. Many of the people it served spoke little English or lacked formal leases to submit. Now, with $36 million to spend under the new program, it opted for weeks of additional planning to train 50 nonprofit groups to find the poorest households  ''Giving away money is actually quite hard,'' said Jen Loving, who runs Destination: Home, a housing group leading the campaign. ''All the money in the world isn't going matter if it doesn't get to the people who need it.''  In Charleston, S.C., housing became a subject of concern after a 2018 study found the area had the country's highest eviction rate. Charleston County ran three rounds of rental relief with CARES Act money, and the state ran two.  The second state program, started with $25 million in February, drew so many applications that it closed in six days. But South Carolina is still processing those requests as it decides how to distribute the new federal funds.  Antonette Worke is among the applicants awaiting an answer. She moved to Charleston from Denver last year, drawn by cheaper rents, warmer weather and a job offer. But the job fell through, and her landlord filed for eviction.  Ms. Worke, who has kidney and liver disease, is temporarily protected by the federal eviction moratorium. But it does not cover tenants whose leases expire, as hers will at the end of next month. Her landlord said he would force her to move, even if the state paid the $5,000 in overdue rent.  Still, she said the help was important: A clean slate would make it easier to rent a new apartment and relieve her of an impossible debt. ''I'm stressing over it to the point where I've made myself sicker,'' she said.  Moving faster than the state, Charleston County started its $12 million program two weeks ago, and workers have taken computers to farmers' markets, community centers and a mall parking lot. Christine DuRant, a deputy county administrator, said the aid was needed to prevent foreclosures that could reduce the housing stock. But critics would pounce if the program sent payments to people who do not qualify, she said: ''We will be audited,'' possibly three times.  Latoya Green is caught where the desire for speed and accounting collide. A clerk who lost hours in the pandemic, she owes $3,700 in rent and utilities and is protected by the eviction moratorium only until her lease expires next month.  She applied for help on the day the county program started but has not completed the application. She said she is unsettled by the emails requesting her lease, which she lacks, and proof of lost income.  Still, Ms. Green does not criticize Charleston County officials. ''I think they're trying their best,'' she said. ''A lot of people run scams.''  With time running short, she added: ''I just hope and pray to God they'll be able to assist me.''  A 2018 study found that the area that includes Charleston, S.C., left, had the highest eviction rate in the country. Antonette Worke, above, is awaiting word on whether South Carolina will pay $5,000 in overdue rent on her home in Charleston (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NORA WILLIAMS FOR THE new_york_times; CAMERON POLLACK FOR THE new_york_times) (A14)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003i "
104		"    Four Months After Jan. 6, McCarthy Is Still on Defensive Over Trump  By Mark Leibovich  2,301 words 26 April 2021   16     But Mr. McCarthy, the House Republican leader who could become speaker after 2022, says he needs to work with Donald Trump, who ''goes up and down with his anger.''  BAKERSFIELD, Calif. -- Kevin McCarthy, the House Republican leader, was in an uncharacteristically dark place.  It was after the Capitol siege of Jan. 6, and he was getting pounded from all sides. He was being accused, accurately, of promoting President Donald J. Trump's stolen-election lies. But Mr. Trump was still enraged at him for not doing more, and his supporters had just ransacked Mr. McCarthy's office.  ''This is the first time I think I've ever been depressed in this job,'' Mr. McCarthy confided to his friend, Representative Patrick T. McHenry, Republican of North Carolina. ''Patrick, man, I'm down, I'm just really down.''  Mr. McHenry told him to gather himself. ''You're dazed,'' Mr. McHenry said, recounting the exchange. ''You have to try to think clearly.''  As the end of the Trump presidency devolved into turmoil and violence, Mr. McCarthy faced a dilemma, one that has bedeviled his party for nearly five years: Should he cut Mr. Trump loose, as many Republicans were urging. Or should he keep trying to make it work with an ousted president who remains the most popular and motivating force inside the G.O.P.?  Mr. McCarthy chose the latter, and not for the first time. His extravagant efforts to ingratiate himself with Mr. Trump have earned him a reputation for being an alpha lap-dog inside Mr. Trump's kennel of acolytes. Nine days after Mr. Trump departed Washington, there was Mr. McCarthy paying a visit to Mar-a-Lago, the former president's Florida estate, in an effort to ''keep up a dialogue'' with the volatile former president.  ''He goes up and down with his anger,'' Mr. McCarthy said of Mr. Trump in a series of interviews during a recent 48-hour swing through Indiana and Iowa, and home to Bakersfield, Calif., which he has represented in Congress since 2007. ''He's mad at everybody one day. He's mad at me one day.''  Now, nearly four months after Jan. 6, Mr. McCarthy continues to defend his support for Mr. Trump's bogus assertions that the election was stolen from him. Friends say that he knows better and is as exasperated by Mr. Trump's behavior as other top Republicans, but that he has made the calculation that the former president's support is essential for his ambitions to become speaker after the 2022 elections, when Republicans have a decent chance to win back the House.  Pressed on whether he regretted working to overturn President Biden's 2020 victory, Mr. McCarthy took the position that he did no such thing.  ''We voted not to certify two states,'' he said, referring to Arizona and Pennsylvania, whose slates of electoral votes Mr. McCarthy and fellow Republicans voted to challenge, despite offering no proof of fraud that would have altered the final tallies. But even if the Republicans' challenge had been successful in those states, Mr. McCarthy argued, the electoral votes would not have been enough to tip the nationwide vote away from Mr. Biden. ''And Joe Biden would still be sitting in the White House right now,'' he said.  So what exactly was he trying to accomplish with his votes against certification on Jan. 6? ''That was the only time that we could raise the issue that there was a question in the activities in those states,'' Mr. McCarthy said.  On Sunday, Mr. McCarthy was further pressed by the ''Fox News Sunday'' host Chris Wallace, who asked whether Mr. Trump had sided with the Jan. 6 rioters when the president told Mr. McCarthy in a phone call that day, according to a claim by another Republican House member, that the mob was ''more upset by the election'' than Mr. McCarthy. Mr. McCarthy had called Mr. Trump to tell him the mob had to stop.  Mr. McCarthy sidestepped, saying Mr. Trump told him that he would ''put something out to make sure to stop this. And that's what he did, he put a video out later.''  ''Quite a lot later,'' Mr. Wallace replied. ''And it was a pretty weak video.''  Mr. McCarthy's dodge speaks to his role as Mr. Trump's chief envoy to Republicans in power. At 56, he is perhaps the most consequential member of his party in post-Trump Washington in large part because of his chance of becoming the next speaker of the House. Republicans need to win roughly five more seats to reclaim a majority in 2022, a viable prospect given that congressional districts are set to be redrawn and precedent favors nonpresidential parties in midterm elections. In contrast, Senate Republicans -- deadlocked 50 to 50 with Democrats -- face a treacherous map, with analysts viewing Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, as less likely to command a majority after 2022.  Mr. McCarthy knows the surest way to blow up his speakership plans would be to alienate Mr. Trump, who relishes being both a potential kingmaker to his favored candidates and saboteur of those he is determined to punish.  ''He could change the whole course of history,'' Mr. McCarthy said, referring to the prospect that Mr. Trump could undermine Republican campaigns, or leave the party entirely. ''This is the tightest tightrope anyone has to walk.''  'Like Your Older Brother'  Mr. McCarthy and Mr. Trump share some essential traits. Both men are more transactional than ideological, possess a healthy belief in their own abilities to charm and tend to be hyper-focused on the zero sum of politics (i.e., winning and losing). As the leader of a minority caucus, Mr. McCarthy has been less concerned with passing signature legislation or advancing any transformational policy initiatives.  His main preoccupation has been doing what it takes to win a majority and become speaker. He has worked feverishly to that end by recruiting candidates, formulating campaign strategies and raising huge sums ($27.1 million in the first quarter of 2021, spread over four targeted funding entities), much of which he has distributed to his members, earning himself the vital currency of their devotion.  ''Kevin has unified the Republican conference more than John Boehner or Paul Ryan ever did,'' said Representative Jim Banks, Republican of Indiana, referring to Mr. McCarthy's leadership predecessors. ''He's been to my district four times. My donors know him. They have his cell number. Kevin's capacity to build and maintain relationships is not normal.''  As the leader of a historically fractious caucus, Mr. McCarthy's most effective unifying tactic has been through common opposition to the ''radical socialist agenda'' of Democrats, particularly Republicans' designated time-honored scoundrels like Representative Maxine Waters of California, after she said protesters should ''get more confrontational'' in the event Derek Chauvin was acquitted in the killing of George Floyd.  Mr. McCarthy moved quickly to call a House vote to censure Ms. Waters. The measure promptly failed as Democrats charged hypocrisy over Mr. McCarthy's unwillingness to condemn worse in his own ranks, among them Representative Matt Gaetz of Florida (possible sex trafficking) and Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia (support in 2019 for assassinating Speaker Nancy Pelosi, among other incendiary stances on social media).  Friends say Mr. McCarthy has little stomach for playing the heavy. ''Look, I work with people I don't get to hire,'' Mr. McCarthy said. He shrugs off the presence of ''problematic'' members as a phenomenon of both sides. ''I'm just a simple person,'' Mr. McCarthy likes to say, a standard line in his stump speech. ''The Senate is like a country club. The House is like a truck stop.'' He prefers eating at a truck stop, he said, ''a freewheeling microcosm of society'' where he would much rather fit in than try to impose order.  ''Kevin is a little like your older brother,'' Mr. McHenry said. ''He doesn't want to be your parent.''  Who's in Charge?  Mr. McCarthy took a seat at a family restaurant in Davenport, Iowa, during a recent visit to highlight a disputed congressional race left over from 2020. Representative Mariannette Miller-Meeks, a Republican, had prevailed by six votes over Rita Hart, a Democrat who was appealing the matter to a House committee. Mr. McCarthy accused Democrats of trying to steal the seat, which invited immediate charges of a yawning double standard given how Mr. McCarthy had supported Mr. Trump's efforts on a much grander scale.  Later that day, Ms. Hart conceded defeat, and the dispute was resolved without riots. ''This is a good day,'' Mr. McCarthy said. But that morning, Mr. Biden had unveiled his infrastructure bill and had called Mr. McConnell, and not Mr. McCarthy, to brief him ahead of time. Mr. McCarthy volunteered that he had not once spoken to Mr. Biden since Inauguration Day, a slight he maintained did not bother him, although the pique in his voice suggested otherwise.  ''When he was vice president, we would do stuff together,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''He would have me up to eat breakfast at his residence.''  Mr. McCarthy flashed a photo of himself from his phone with the vice president at the time, separated by tall glasses of orange juice and plates of freshly cut melon and blueberries. Mr. McCarthy, who likes to attend Hollywood award shows and big-ticket galas, brandished phone photos of himself over two days with other eminences, including Mr. Trump, Pope Francis, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Kobe Bryant. There was also one of himself in high school with majestically feathered hair.  But he is also a small-town guy who keeps up with old boyhood pals and still seems enamored of having been popular at Bakersfield High School, where he played tight end on the football team. He travels home often to his district lined with swaying oil jacks, spread across California's agricultural interior, two hours north and a world removed from Los Angeles, not to mention Washington 2,700 miles away.  The son of a firefighter, Mr. McCarthy has a shorthand bio that's well-worn: He won $5,000 in a lottery, left community college to open a deli, learned firsthand the havoc government intrusion can inflict on business owners, sold the deli, earned a marketing degree and M.B.A. at California State University, Bakersfield, and was elected to the California Legislature in 2002.  The waitress came over, and Mr. McCarthy ordered fried chicken and chunky apple sauce.  The meal landed while he was on hold waiting to be interviewed by Sean Hannity, giving Mr. McCarthy the chance to methodically rip apart his fried chicken. He separated the batter and meat from the bone with savage gusto, and shoveled as much as possible into his mouth before the interview began. His fingers grew greasy, as did his phone.  The gist of the Hannity interview was consistent with one of Mr. McCarthy's recurring themes of late: Democrats are acting in a heavy-handed manner antithetical to Mr. Biden's conciliatory impulses. This therefore proved that Mr. Biden was not really in charge of his own government, a familiar Republican trope since the popular-so-far Mr. Biden took over.  'That's My Job'  Mr. McCarthy became the House Republican leader after his party lost its majority in 2018 and Mr. Ryan retired. Republicans came shockingly close to winning back the majority in 2020, despite predictions they would lose seats in a coronavirus-ravaged economy and with an unpopular president leading the ticket. Instead, the party netted about a dozen seats, leaving it only five short. Mr. McCarthy's colleagues began referring to him as ''speaker in waiting.''  After the House chamber was evacuated on Jan. 6, Mr. McCarthy retreated to his Capitol office with a colleague, Representative Bruce Westerman, Republican of Arkansas. When it became evident the rioters were breaking in, Mr. McCarthy's security detail insisted he leave. But Mr. Westerman was left behind in Mr. McCarthy's inner work area, he said in a recent interview.  For protection, Mr. Westerman said he commandeered a Civil War sword from an office display, barricaded himself in Mr. McCarthy's private bathroom and waited out the siege while crouched on the toilet.  Friends describe the postelection period as traumatic for Mr. McCarthy, who publicly perpetuated the fiction that Mr. Trump had won while privately asking him to stop.  ''Every day seemed worse than the day before,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster and frequent McCarthy sidekick. ''He knew the impossible position he was in.''  Still, the turmoil never brought Mr. McCarthy to a breaking point with Mr. Trump. ''Look, I didn't want him to leave the party,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''Mitch had stopped talking to him a number of months before. People criticize me for having a relationship with the president. That's my job.''  Whenever the former president's name came up in these interviews, Mr. McCarthy would lower his voice and speak haltingly, wary of not casting Mr. Trump in a way that might upset him. ''Is this story going to be all about Trump?'' Mr. McCarthy asked, after back-to-back questions on him. He then paused, seemingly bracing for a ceiling fan to drop on his head.  Catie Edmondson contributed reporting from Washington.  Catie Edmondson contributed reporting from Washington.  Representative Kevin McCarthy's main preoccupation has been doing what it takes for his party to win back the House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times); Mr. McCarthy's current role has positioned him as perhaps the most consequential Republican in post-Trump Washington. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003h "
105		"   Technology; SECTA The Reputation Business Has a Dirty Secret  By Aaron Krolik and Kashmir Hill  3,041 words 26 April 2021   1     I wanted to slander someone.  My colleague Kashmir Hill and I were trying to learn who is responsible for -- and profiting from -- the growing ecosystem of websites whose primary purpose is destroying reputations.  So I wrote a nasty post. About myself.  Then we watched as a constellation of sites duplicated my creation.  To get slander removed, many people hire a ''reputation management'' company. In my case, it was going to cost roughly $20,000.  We soon discovered a secret, hidden behind a smokescreen of fake companies and false identities. The people facilitating slander and the self-proclaimed good guys who help remove it are often one and the same.  By Aaron Krolik and Kashmir Hill  At first glance, the websites appear amateurish.  They have names like BadGirlReports.date, BustedCheaters.com and WorstHomeWrecker.com. Photos are badly cropped. Grammar and spelling are afterthoughts. They are clunky and text-heavy, as if they're intended to be read by machines, not humans.  But do not underestimate their power. When someone attacks you on these so-called gripe sites, the results can be devastating. Earlier this year, we wrote about a woman in Toronto who poisoned the reputations of dozens of her perceived enemies by posting lies about them.  To assess the slander's impact, we wrote a software program to download every post from a dozen of the most active complaint sites: more than 150,000 posts about some 47,000 people. Then we set up a web crawler that searched Google and Bing for thousands of the people who had been attacked.  For about one-third of the people, the nasty posts appeared on the first pages of their results. For more than half, the gripe sites showed up at the top of their image results.  Sometimes search engines go a step further than simply listing links; they display what they consider the most relevant phrases about whatever you're searching for.  One woman in Ohio was the subject of so many negative posts that Bing declared in bold at the top of her search results that she ''is a liar and a cheater'' -- the same way it states that Barack Obama was the 44th president of the United States. For roughly 500 of the 6,000 people we searched for, Google suggested adding the phrase ''cheater'' to a search of their names.  The unverified claims are on obscure, ridiculous-looking sites, but search engines give them a veneer of credibility. Posts from Cheaterboard.com appear in Google results alongside Facebook pages and LinkedIn profiles -- or, in my case, articles in The new_york_times.  That would be bad enough for people whose reputations have been savaged. But the problem is all the worse because it's so hard to fix. And that is largely because of the secret, symbiotic relationship between those facilitating slander and those getting paid to remove it.  The posts I created featured an awkward selfie and described me as a ''loser who will do anything for attention.'' We posted a version of the same insult on five gripe sites. Each selfie included a unique watermark that allowed us to track it if it showed up somewhere new. For an image posted to Cheaterboard.com, for example, we hid the domain name and the date in the file code.  The posts spread quickly. Inside two hours, the Cheaterboard one had popped up on FoulSpeakers.com. Within a month, the original five posts had spawned 21 copies on 15 sites.  What was the point of copying the posts? A big clue were the ads that appeared next to them, offering help removing reputation-tarnishing content.  We contacted all of the sites that copied the original posts. Only two responded, and only one person consented to an interview: Cyrus Sullivan, who runs FoulSpeakers.com.  Mr. Sullivan, 37, of Portland, Ore., has been in the complaint-site business since 2008, when he started STDCarriers.com. It was inspired by his own experience; in his senior year at the University of Oregon, he said, he had sex with a woman who belatedly told him that she had herpes.  ''I thought there needs to be a way to warn people about something like that,'' Mr. Sullivan said. STDCarriers.com let people anonymously post unverified information about people who they said had sexually transmitted diseases.  Mr. Sullivan said he hadn't made much money until 2012, when STDCarriers.com attracted national media attention. Anderson Cooper had a daytime talk show at the time, and he did a segment dressing down Mr. Sullivan and others who ran complaint sites. Mr. Sullivan's web traffic soared, and posts soon flooded the site.  After a couple of stints in jail -- among other things, he was convicted of sending death threats to a woman and of throwing Sriracha Doritos into the face of police officers, ''using the spicy dust as a weapon, like pepper spray,'' according to a court filing -- he started FoulSpeakers.com in 2018. It billed itself as ''a foul speech search engine and web archive'' that captured awful things written about people on other sites, such as my post on Cheaterboard.com.  Mr. Sullivan told us that copying content was a great way to lure people to his sites. (He said he didn't feel bad about spreading unverified slander. ''Teach children not to talk to strangers, then teach them not to believe what they read on the internet,'' he said.)  But there was a financial incentive as well. Mr. Sullivan had started a reputation-management service to help people get ''undesirable information'' about themselves removed from their search engine results. The ''gold package'' cost $699.99. For those customers, Mr. Sullivan would alter the computer code underlying the offending posts, instructing search engines to ignore them.  Some reputation-management firms use adversarial tactics to get posts taken down. But cozier relationships are the norm.  For example, ads for 247Removal.com appear on a dozen prominent gripe websites, and were attached to some of the posts about me. 247Removal's owner is Heidi Glosser, 38. She said she didn't know how her ads had ended up on those sites.  Ms. Glosser charges $750 or more per post removal, which adds up to thousands of dollars for most of her clients. To get posts removed, she said, she often pays an ''administrative fee'' to the gripe site's webmaster. We asked her whether this was extortion. ''I can't really give you a direct answer,'' she said.  On the first page of Ms. Glosser's own Google search results is a link to a court ruling related to her 2003 conviction for burglary and safecracking. ''It's not related to me,'' she said. She urged us to do a background check on her, which confirmed her involvement.  Ms. Glosser said she had decided to try to help people improve their online reputations in 2018, after she watched an 11-minute documentary about revenge porn. The film focused on Scott Breitenstein, a former plumber who ran sites hosting nude photos of people posted without their consent.  Sites controlled by Mr. Breitenstein also were venues for unverified allegations about cheaters, scams, predators, deadbeats and ''potential johns.'' After the documentary came out, Mr. Breitenstein told business partners that he had sold his websites. He didn't respond to requests for comment.  Ms. Glosser said her goal was to assist victims of Mr. Breitenstein and his ilk.  Ms. Glosser used to live near Mr. Breitenstein in Dayton, Ohio. She said that was a coincidence. ''Dayton is not as small as everyone thinks it is,'' she said. She said she doesn't know Mr. Breitenstein.  Why, then, were Ms. Glosser and her deceased wife friendly with members of the Breitenstein family on Facebook?  Ms. Glosser wouldn't say.  We noticed that the same ad kept appearing on the proliferating posts about me being a loser. It was a simple text ad for something called RepZe.com: ''Remove Cheaters Sites Contents.''  Most sidebar ads are programmatic. That means they are served up by an ad network with no involvement by the people who run a site, and they change every time you visit. That wasn't the case here. The RepZe ads were permanent fixtures, written into the websites' coding.  When Kashmir called RepZe, a woman identifying herself as Sofia refused to answer questions and said to email the company instead. Nobody responded to the emails.  When I reached out to RepZe via a form on its site to ask about removing one of the posts about me, Sofia called me. She said that for $1,500 the post would be removed within 24 hours. The removal would come with a ''lifetime guarantee,'' she said.  She encouraged me to act quickly. ''I don't want to scare you, but these posts can spread,'' she warned.  At this point, we figured that when someone paid a company like RepZe to get a post removed, RepZe then paid the complaint site to delete it. But our understanding turned out to be incomplete at best.  RepZe claims to be based in a Denver suburb. But the company isn't registered for business in Colorado. The address on its website belongs to Anytime Mailbox, which charges $9.99 per month to create the appearance of an office, accepting mail on someone's behalf and then scanning and emailing it to the client. (Anytime's chief executive, Matt Going, said he couldn't answer questions about RepZe, except to say it was no longer a customer.)  The three people listed as RepZe employees have scant online presences and do not seem to exist. One page on the website includes a message from RepZe's chief executive, identified as ''Mr. M. Moore.'' At the bottom of the message is what appears to be his signature. Upon closer inspection, it is Marilyn Monroe's autograph.  RepZe has promotional videos on YouTube. The people in the videos, including those who claimed to be employees or customers, are paid actors. (We identified them on a freelancing site, Fiverr, where they charged as little as $25 to appear in videos.)  We tracked down actual customers of RepZe. All relayed the same basic story. They had hired the company to remove negative posts about them, which it quickly did. But then RepZe would threaten that, absent swift payment of the thousands of dollars the customers had agreed to pay, the posts would reappear and multiply.  ''The content will be restored,'' a RepZe representative wrote in a text to one customer, who posted screenshots of the exchange on Facebook. ''We are trying to help. You are trying to piss my ass off.''  Then, months later, the posts would reappear.  One disgruntled customer created RepZeFraud.com under the pseudonym Greg Saint. He said he had paid RepZe $4,000 in 2019 to remove two negative posts. Months later, he said, copies of the posts began reappearing online, and he suspected RepZe was responsible. He created RepZeFraud.com to expose the person he thought was really behind the service: a 28-year-old web developer in India, Vikram Parmar.  We had first heard Mr. Parmar's name months earlier, from a California software developer, Aaron Greenspan.  Mr. Greenspan runs PlainSite.org, which posts court documents and thus makes people's criminal records easier to find. He said one of those people, a convicted murderer, had tried to destroy his and his family's online reputations.  Mr. Greenspan could have paid to get the posts removed, but he didn't like the idea of ransom. Instead, he set out to unmask whoever was behind the sites and the reputation-management companies. This was easier said than done.  ''You don't know where it is, who runs it, who hosts it,'' he said. ''That's how they evade any accountability.''  The websites use what are known as privacy proxy services to hide who owns them and where they're hosted. Mr. Greenspan combed through digital clues and tracked down lawsuits involving the sites -- which he began cataloging on PlainSite -- to map out the industry. He concluded that many sites appeared to be owned by a small handful of people. Every time he got in touch with one of them, that person would point him to other people and say they were the true bad actors.  Mr. Greenspan got in touch with RepZe, which had ads next to many of the posts attacking him. He pretended to be an interested customer. RepZe gave him a quote of $14,800 to remove 17 posts. The company sent a contract. Mr. Greenspan looked at the document's metadata and found ''Vikram Parmar'' listed as the author.  A quick Google search revealed that Mr. Parmar faced criminal charges. In 2014, he had created a fake website that charged people money to apply for nonexistent jobs with India's Central Bureau of Investigation. Prosecutors in New Delhi charged him and a collaborator with criminal conspiracy. (Mr. Parmar claimed that an ''unscrupulous client'' had hired him to create what he thought was a legitimate website. The case is pending.)  Mr. Greenspan sent Mr. Parmar a message on Skype in September 2019. They began to chat. (Mr. Greenspan showed us screenshots of the chats.) He demanded that Mr. Parmar delete posts about him for free. Mr. Parmar removed one, on DirtyScam.com, and then their conversation became friendlier.  Mr. Parmar complained to Mr. Greenspan about the greediness of the owners of other complaint sites. One of them was a guy in Ohio named Scott Breitenstein, who Mr. Parmar said owned hundreds of sites that stole original content from ''legitimate'' ones.  Mr. Parmar told Mr. Greenspan that he'd had to pay Mr. Breitenstein to get copycat posts taken down. He said Mr. Breitenstein had instructed him to send checks to another person. Her name was Heidi Glosser.  We reached Mr. Parmar via Skype in February. He was on vacation in the Indian seaside town of Goa. We said we were working on an article about the reputation-management industry. He denied involvement, saying he was ''a real estate builder and also working on some government projects.''  Then we laid out what we knew.  We had linked Mr. Parmar not just to RepZe but also to another cleanup service, RemoveReports.com. In addition, we had found that he was involved with ReportCheater.com, WebActivism.com, WtfCheater.com, RealtorScam.com and DirtyScam.com. All were listed by RepZe or RemoveReports as places from which they could remove content.  At least one of the sites had been registered under Mr. Parmar's name. Others were linked to him in different ways. Some have the same Google ad account; some share IP addresses; some had been registered to Mr. Parmar's email address.  In other words, Mr. Parmar seemed to be running sites that produced slander and running sites that made money by removing that slander.  Mr. Parmar sounded uneasy. He said anyone could use anyone else's email address to register a site. Then he admitted to doing some reputation-management work. Then he asked that his name not be used in this article. Then he suggested other people in the industry whom we should investigate instead of him. (The list included Mr. Breitenstein and Ms. Glosser.)  ''You are pretty much accurate but targeting a wrong guy,'' he wrote in a Skype message. ''I am just mediator,'' he added. ''I am one of the gentleman.''  Mr. Parmar resurfaced in April, about 20 minutes after we emailed RepZe seeking comment for this article. In messages over Skype, he said he didn't own the complaint sites but was providing them services, including helping them improve their performance on search engines.  Why were his email address and Google ad accounts linked to the complaint sites? Mr. Parmar didn't have a coherent explanation.  Three months after my experiment started, my search results were suffering the consequences. Bing helpfully recommended adding ''loser'' to a search for ''Aaron Krolik.'' When you Googled my name, Cheaters.news was at the top of the image results.  There's no way for me to delete the posts that I wrote; the slander sites don't allow that. Based on estimates provided by removal services, it would cost me about $20,000 to get the posts taken down -- and even then, more posts might appear in their place.  There is another way to lessen the posts' impact. In certain circumstances, Google will remove harmful content from individuals' search results, including links to ''sites with exploitative removal practices.'' If a site charges to remove posts, you can ask Google not to list it.  Google didn't advertise this policy widely, and few victims of online slander seem aware that it's an option. That's in part because when you Google ways to clean up your search results, Google's solution is buried under ads for reputation-management services like RepZe.  I eventually found the Google form. I submitted a claim to have one URL removed. ''Your email has been sent to our team,'' Google told me.  Three days later, I received an email from Google saying the URL would be removed from my search results. Later that day, it was gone. I submitted the 25 other links. They were removed, too, but images from gripe sites kept reappearing in my search results.  Other people who have used Google's form reported similar experiences: It mostly works, but is less effective for images. And if you have an attacker who won't stop writing posts about you, it's almost useless. The slander remains.  Mr. Parmar, a self-described expert in how to influence search results, has recently taken steps to burnish his own reputation. Around the time that we started trying to reach him, articles began appearing online casting him in glowing terms.  One piece gushed about his ''rags-to-riches story.'' Another, on Freelancer.com, said his web-marketing business generated $2 million a year in revenue. Mr. Parmar was quoted as saying he had bought cars for himself and his family.  ''I live like a BOSS,'' he said.  Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0004g "
106		"    How Many Pages Should a Résumé Be?  345 words 26 April 2021   20     Readers who have written the documents for a living say one or two pages, max.  To the Editor:  Re ''I Have Read Thousands of Résumés, and I Have Some Advice,'' by A-J Aronstein (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, April 17):  I have also read thousands -- actually tens of thousands -- of résumés, both as the head of human resources in three different industries as well as in my role as a résumé writer. Mr. Aronstein writes that ''the strongest will fit on a single page.'' This is terrible advice for people whose careers require more space.  The one-page résumé is one of those myths that need to be ignored. Three pages is too long, so for all but tyros in the work force, two-page résumés hit the sweet spot.  The function of a résumé is to motivate the employer to invite candidates for an interview, where they can sell themselves. As such, the best résumés articulate a ''value proposition'' -- the reason this individual is what the employer is looking for -- succinctly and with specific examples that show, not tell, employers what the candidate is capable of.  Lynda Spiegel  Forest Hills, Queens  To the Editor:  As a retired executive search consultant retained to hunt down important future employees, I can report that in 30 years I have not read thousands of résumés. I never had the time, nor does any hiring executive. And that is the key to an effective résumé.  Above all else, it is an advertisement whose sole purpose is to get the candidate in the door for an in-person interview. Not only should it be limited to one page, as the article suggests, but the first paragraph of the résumé is the most important, and often the only part read.  In one sentence it should highlight what the candidate has accomplished and why he or she should be seen. All else is mere commentary.  Stanley Herz  Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY James Kerr/Scorpion Dagger FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00038 "
107		"    How Many Pages Should a Résumé Be?  680 words 26 April 2021   20     Readers who have written the documents for a living say one page or two, max. Also: Babies and facial cues; rights for women in Venezuela.  To the Editor:  Re ''I Have Read Thousands of Résumés, and I Have Some Advice,'' by A-J Aronstein (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, April 17):  I have also read thousands -- actually tens of thousands -- of résumés, both as the head of human resources in three different industries as well as in my role as a résumé writer. Mr. Aronstein writes that ''the strongest will fit on a single page.'' This is terrible advice for people whose careers require more space.  The one-page résumé is one of those myths that need to be ignored. Three pages is too long, so for all but tyros in the work force, two-page résumés hit the sweet spot.  The function of a résumé is to motivate the employer to invite candidates for an interview, where they can sell themselves. As such, the best résumés articulate a ''value proposition'' -- the reason this individual is what the employer is looking for -- succinctly and with specific examples that show, not tell, employers what the candidate is capable of.  Lynda Spiegel  Forest Hills, Queens  To the Editor:  As a retired executive search consultant retained to hunt down important future employees, I can report that in 30 years I have not read thousands of résumés. I never had the time, nor does any hiring executive. And that is the key to an effective résumé.  Above all else, it is an advertisement whose sole purpose is to get the candidate in the door for an in-person interview. Not only should it be limited to one page, as the article suggests, but the first paragraph of the résumé is the most important, and often the only part read.  In one sentence it should highlight what the candidate has accomplished and why he or she should be seen. All else is mere commentary.  Stanley Herz  Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.  Children and Facial Cues After the Masks Come Off  To the Editor:  As a retired psychotherapist who has read articles in The Times about returning to normality, I am concerned about the babies and toddlers who have never seen anyone except immediate family members without masks.  To these little ones, masked faces are normal. Once we are able to go maskless, will some of these children grow up more fearful of other people than they otherwise would? Will they be unable to learn to recognize certain facial expressions and react appropriately?  Are there things their families can do now to ameliorate these kinds of effects and ease babies' and small children's transitions to a maskless world in what we hope is the near future?  Jeanne Paul  Ann Arbor, Mich.  Women's Rights in Venezuela  To the Editor:  Re ''A Girl Was Raped. The Women Who Helped Her Were Arrested (front page, April 14):  Vannesa Rosales is not a criminal, but a human rights defender. Her bravery in accompanying the 13-year-old girl in this story was recognized as legitimate work in defense of sexual and reproductive rights by several international human rights groups. They also reminded Venezuela of the importance of decriminalizing abortion.  When abortion is considered a crime, women and girls who require this health service are treated as criminals. Defenders like Ms. Rosales are also stigmatized and persecuted. This creates a climate of fear among organizations and activists, who no longer feel safe providing desperately needed information and services.  In a country like Venezuela that is in the middle of a humanitarian emergency that makes access to contraception and maternal health care virtually impossible, the effects of criminalization are devastating and even deadly.  Persecuting and criminalizing the brave people who protect the rights of women and girls does not save lives; it endangers entire communities.  Marcia Aguiluz  San José, Costa Rica  The writer is managing attorney at Women's Link Worldwide.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY James Kerr/Scorpion Dagger FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00037 "
108		"    Bob Fass, 87, Is Dead; A Controversial D.J. Of Underground Radio  By Joseph Berger  1,704 words 26 April 2021   7     His provocative ''Radio Unnameable,'' long a staple of the New York station WBAI, offered a home on the FM dial to everyone from Abbie Hoffman to Tiny Tim.  Bob Fass, who for more than 50 years hosted an anarchic and influential radio show on New York's countercultural FM station WBAI that mixed political conversation, avant-garde music, serendipitous encounters and outright agitation, died on Saturday in Monroe, N.C., where he lived in recent years. He was 87.  His wife, Lynnie Tofte, said he had been hospitalized with Covid 19 earlier in the month, but he died of congestive heart failure.  Mr. Fass called his long-running show ''Radio Unnameable,'' because its freewheeling format did not fit into conventional categories like Top 40 or all talk.  In a gravelly, avuncular baritone that was both soothingly intimate and insistently urgent, and that sometimes reflected the mellowing impact of the pot he smoked on the air, he might start out with a critique of segregation or the Vietnam War, then introduce a Greenwich Village friend named Abbie Hoffman to muse about a demonstration by the radical and theatrical Yippies that had showered traders in the New York Stock Exchange with dollar bills.  Or he might bring on an ambitious Minnesotan named Bob Dylan, pretending to be an entrepreneur who manufactured clothing for folk singers. In various appearances, Mr. Dylan did comic monologues featuring characters with names like Elvis Bickel, Rumple Billy Burp and Frog Rugster, and asked cabbies to bring food to the station. In one appearance he tried out an unfinished composition, ''Blowin' in the Wind.''  ''I'd put anyone on, because the idea was if you didn't like what I was doing, three minutes later I'd be doing something else,'' Mr. Fass once told an interviewer.  Mr. Fass was not the first freestyle disc jockey in the country, but he became the most prominent. He helped forge the identity of WBAI, a noncommercial, listener-sponsored station already known for his leftist stance, and paved the way for other popular WBAI hosts like Larry Josephson and Steve Post.  At times Mr. Fass, who helped found the Yippies, served as the instigator of what today might be called crowdsourcing. In February 1967, he urged listeners to flood the International Arrivals Building at John F. Kennedy International Airport for a ''fly-in,'' to greet incoming travelers after midnight. About 3,000 people, many of them intoxicated both by marijuana and by the excitement of taking part in a seemingly pointless communal escapade, showed up.  Another time, he encouraged listeners to head to the East Village for a ''sweep-in,'' to clean up several blocks of East Seventh Street that had been left filthy by a sanitation workers' strike, pointing out that trash was being picked up on more affluent streets like Park Avenue. When the embarrassed Sanitation Department pre-empted the plan by cleaning up the street itself, Mr. Fass's followers, armed with brooms and mops, moved down to an equally dirty East Third Street.  Such was the loyalty of his midnight-to-dawn listeners -- overnight-shift workers, cabdrivers, insomniacs and hippies, among others -- that he likened them to co-conspirators. His signature greeting was ''Good morning, cabal.''  In 1971, in one of the most dramatic episodes of his career, a caller told Mr. Fass that he was so despondent about having made a mess of his life that he had swallowed an overdose of pills. With thousands of listeners riveted by the live drama, Mr. Fass kept the caller talking while dispatching associates to contact the police. The telephone number was traced, and the caller was found unconscious but alive in an Upper East Side apartment.  Mr. Fass's provocateur persona sometimes got him into trouble. In 1977, he was a leader of a unionizing effort at WBAI, exploiting his microphone to garner support against his employers, the Pacifica Foundation, and changes it had instituted in management and format. He even barricaded himself in the studio, which at the time was in a church at East 62nd Street, and continued broadcasting until executives called in the police. He was banned from the station for five years.  While other hosts got more mainstream jobs in public radio, Mr. Fass was determined to find another formless show, according to an account in the 2007 book ''Something in the Air: Radio, Rock and the Revolution That Shaped a Generation,'' by Marc Fisher. Having never earned more than $175 a week, he was forced to live off unemployment checks and the proceeds of fund-raising benefits. His obduracy alienated friends; Mr. Josephson, another WBAI host, said, ''None of us were pure enough for him.''  He finally accepted an unpaid offer to do his show once a week on WFMU, a noncommercial New Jersey station. The station let him retain his ''Radio Unnameable'' format, but it did not have the New York City audience he craved. He was miserable until WBAI took him back in 1982, although the station no longer granted him five nights a week, and in 2006 his airtime was reduced to once a week.  In 2018, Mr. Fass suffered a fiasco not unlike those he used to hear about from distressed late-night callers. While he was moving his belongings from his home in Staten Island to a house in Danbury, Conn., he flicked on a malfunctioning gas fireplace and set off a two-alarm blaze. Mr. Fass, who was using a wheelchair, had to be carried out by the movers but inhaled a good deal of smoke. Scores of tapes of shows that he had held onto were damaged.  ''I could have been roast D.J.,'' he told a reporter.  The move to Connecticut ultimately fell through, and Mr. Fass and Ms. Tofte, his only immediate survivor, moved to North Carolina. (His first marriage, to Bridget Potter, a former vice president for programming at HBO, ended in divorce.), He continued to do a weekly three-hour midnight show from there until recently.  Unlike Jean Shepherd, another free-form pioneer, Mr. Fass rarely mined his childhood for on-air material, so listeners did not know much about his origins. He was born on June 29, 1933, to Jack and Nancy Fass, children of Jewish immigrants -- his grandmother knew Emma Goldman -- and was raised in Brooklyn. His father was an accountant.  A shy, socially uneasy boy, he was drawn to acting, and after graduating from Syracuse University, he studied with Sanford Meisner and Sydney Pollack at the Neighborhood Playhouse and took workshops with Stella Adler. He had small roles in productions of Brendan Behan's ''The Hostage'' and ''The Execution of Private Slovik.'' After an Army tour in the mid-1950s, he appeared in the original Off Broadway production of ''The Threepenny Opera,'' with a cast that included Lotte Lenya.  It was during the empty hours at an Army base in North Carolina that he became an obsessive radio listener, tuning in on a transistor radio while lying in his bunk. In 1963, a high school friend, the poet Richard Elman, helped him get a job as an announcer at a WBAI. He was given a midnight slot that had been largely unfilled until then.  Mr. Fass, according to Marc Fisher's account, molded his program to the contours of a show on KPFA, the Pacifica Foundation's flagship station in Berkeley, Calif., a mix of jazz, political commentary and comic sketches, but he put his own spin on it. In one highlight of his show's long run, Abbie Hoffman, one of eight antiwar activists (known as the Chicago Eight and, after Bobby Seale of the Black Panthers was removed from the case, the Chicago Seven) who had been charged with inciting to riot during the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, called in updates of their trial.  Word spread of Mr. Fass's openness to offbeat entertainment. The show attracted an eccentric falsetto-voiced singer named Tiny Tim and musicians like Richie Havens, Joni Mitchell, Muddy Waters, Frank Zappa and Ramblin' Jack Elliott, some of whom were just starting out. Arlo Guthrie tried out several versions of his song ''Alice's Restaurant,'' and Mr. Fass played Jerry Jeff Walker's song ''Mr. Bojangles,'' about a street dancer in New Orleans, so frequently that it led Atco Records to sign Mr. Walker to a contract.  Mr. Fass gave airtime to poets like Allen Ginsberg and Gregory Corso and staged a recitation of ''Waiting for Godot.'' He once brought in people he identified as representatives of Stamp Out Smut, an organization opposed to the performances of Lenny Bruce, and then, underscoring his own political slant, followed up with a recording of a Bruce monologue.  One of Mr. Fass's steady listeners was said to be a young Howard Stern, who would go on to create a free-form radio show of his own, extending Mr. Fass's legacy to future generations.  A documentary about Mr. Fass by Paul Lovelace and Jessica Wolfson, also called ''Radio Unnameable,'' was released in 2012.  ''Radio Unnameable'' was such a chronicle of the counterculture that Columbia University purchased 10,000 hours of deteriorating tape recordings of the program from Mr. Fass and began digitizing them. The recordings included his running account of the 1968 occupation of Columbia buildings by students protesting the construction of a university gymnasium.  ''We have taken on a major audio archive of an outsider figure who was positioned uniquely at a critical moment in American history,'' Sean M. Quimby, the director of Columbia's Rare Book & Manuscript Library, said in 2016. ''At the end of the day, this is a huge corpus of data that will used by historians.''  Clockwise from top: Bob Fass in 1968 with Abbie Hoffman, a frequent guest on ''Radio Unnameable''; Mr. Fass at the New York FM station WBAI in 1972; and Mr. Fass, left, with the New York City sanitation commissioner, Joseph F. Periconi, during a ''sweep-in'' in the East Vllage in 1967. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT ALTMAN/GETTY IMAGES; DONAL F. HOLWAY/THE new_york_times; FRED W. MCDARRAH/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003l "
109		"    Rah-Rah Coach Looks to Enliven A Blah Franchise  By Ken Belson and Ben Shpigel  2,203 words 26 April 2021   1     They filed into the first few rows of TIAA Bank Field, 120 staffers from the Jacksonville Jaguars' business side, sitting there like so many college boosters and alumni Urban Meyer had addressed over the years. He gathered them there on a sunny afternoon in early March, nearly two months after being hired to revive one of the N.F.L.'s more forlorn franchises, to deliver a speech similar in spirit and substance to ones he'd given as the coach at college behemoths like Ohio State and Florida.  After retiring from coaching in 2018, Meyer, 56, had a cushy television gig and a secure legacy as one of the best, and most polarizing, coaches in recent college football history. But he was still unfulfilled. He wanted to coach again, and despite the N.F.L.'s history of conquering celebrated college coaches trying to recreate their glory in the pros, Meyer determined his best fit was with the worst team of the last decade.  Tabbed to try to reorient this wayward organization, Meyer conjured his past as an ace recruiter. Wearing white shorts and a gray Jaguars pullover, he urged the assembled employees to ''own it,'' a call to action he also used at the Jan. 15 news conference introducing him as Jacksonville's new coach. He implored them to take pride in every facet of the organization, right down to the team logo.  ''This, right now, is not the most respected logo in the N.F.L. -- it's not,'' Meyer said that day. ''If in three years it still doesn't mean much, then you're probably looking for a new coach and we've not been very successful. That's how personally I'm taking it.''  Meyer's rah-rah message underscored that his competitive drive to own anything and everything about a program, a compulsion that produced three national titles -- two at Florida and one at Ohio State -- remained fierce, even after a two-year layoff.  That self-imposed time away from coaching came after a string of scandals and stress- and health-related issues helped cause him to resign or retire three times in his career. Meyer's college teams were 187-32 (.854) while, at Florida, there were 31 arrests of players during his tenure, and, at Ohio State, he protected a longtime assistant with a history of domestic abuse.  As he weighed whether to re-enter a culture that glorifies workaholics, Meyer did not choose any of the more visible (and venerable) franchises that also wanted him. Instead he pursued the top job in one of the N.F.L.'s smallest markets with a team that perennially has to quell speculation that it will move to London.  Jacksonville is poised on Thursday to select Clemson's Trevor Lawrence, one of the best quarterback prospects in decades, with the first overall pick in the N.F.L. draft. After years of disarray, the Jaguars, as desperate for an identity as they are for victories, have arrived at the most critical juncture since their inception in 1995, an inflection point that the team owner Shahid Khan called ''a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity in football.'' The union between Meyer and Khan is meant to make good on it.  ''Now, we get a fresh start,'' Khan said in an interview in mid-April. ''Everybody gets that this isn't rebuilding. I mean, we need to win now.''  Since Khan's first season as owner in 2012, no team has a worse record than the Jaguars (39-105), who until last year's 1-15 debacle somehow never managed to be quite putrid enough to earn the No. 1 draft pick. They have outspent every other team in free agency over that period, but recorded only one winning season, in 2017, during which they lost the A.F.C. title game at New England. Since that apex, Jacksonville is 12-36.  John Caputo, the president of Bold City Brigade, a Jaguars supporters club with chapters around the country and overseas, likes to say that fair-weather Jacksonville fans cannot exist. For years, they have endured taunts about their team, their city, their own perceived apathy, and still they fork over discretionary income to watch bad football in person.  The darkness lifted in December when the worst season in franchise history yielded its most promising moment: The winless Jets beat the Los Angeles Rams in Week 15, vaulting one-win Jacksonville ahead on tiebreakers for the right to draft Lawrence. ''The last month of the season was the most fun we've had since 2017 even though we were setting a franchise record for being terrible,'' Caputo said. ''Because of the Trevor watch.''  As the Jets edged Los Angeles, Caputo sat, riveted, at a bar near his home in Jacksonville Beach. Patrons chanted, ''J-E-T-S, Jets, Jets, Jets!'' Afraid the Jets would lose if he left, Caputo stayed until the end.  ''For the last 10 years all we want is for the Jaguars to win, but they lose,'' Caputo said in a video call. ''And so now we're actually cheering for them to lose, which was kind of liberating.''  His friend Pat Donnell, the Brigade's vice president, chimed in: ''And they didn't let us down.''  In light of the team's rebuilding fortune, fans are rallying to newfound ambitions. Since Meyer arrived, deposits for season tickets have poured in so fast -- and from so many new customers -- that the Jaguars hired 20 new sales representatives. Traffic on the team's website and social media accounts has soared, with much of it coming from locations outside Florida, including the Midwest, where Meyer last coached.  A bonanza of fan-designed apparel has cropped up. ''Urban Renewal'' merchandise is for sale along with T-shirts blaring ''Hope,'' beneath Lawrence's photo, a nod to the popular Shepard Fairey-designed poster for Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign.  Scores of Jaguars fans contributed $9.04, a homage to Jacksonville's area code, and bought Lawrence and his new wife, Marissa, a $299.95 toaster from their wedding registry. The fans' gifts, combined with $20,000 Lawrence said he'd chip in and other donations, added up to more than $54,000 that will be given to charities. ''Thanks again, we hope to be a part of your community soon,'' Lawrence responded on Twitter.  Lawrence's pending arrival has reinvigorated a franchise that has tried and failed to find a quarterback to outshine Mark Brunell, who started eight playoff games for Jacksonville in the late 1990s. But Meyer's hiring has given the Jaguars immediate credibility as a team that might also responsibly manage a talented star's rise.  Khan and Meyer had chatted at a few functions over the years, but it wasn't until Khan bumped into Meyer at an invitation-only N.F.L. party before the Super Bowl in February 2020 in Miami Gardens, Fla., that they shared an extended conversation. As they discussed each other's backgrounds, Khan found that Meyer's leadership traits were similar to those he'd acquired immigrating to the United States from Pakistan at age 16 and becoming a global auto parts magnate: relentless ambition, a hands-on temperament, trust in his staff.  Though Meyer fielded interest from other teams, he was drawn in by Khan's offer to remake the franchise in his image. If he succeeds, Meyer can become only the fourth coach to win both a national college championship and a Super Bowl, after Jimmy Johnson, Barry Switzer and Pete Carroll.  ''If you know Urban, I mean, he doesn't do much on quick decisions or on a whim,'' said Florida Coach Dan Mullen, a close friend and former assistant of Meyer's. ''Everything he does is extremely well thought out with a very detailed plan of why he would do it.''  Prepping for coaching interviews, Meyer had canvassed his former players in the N.F.L. and contacted, among others, Johnson to learn how he rebuilt the Dallas Cowboys three decades ago after leaving the University of Miami.  The conversations with Khan moved swiftly, and Meyer called his decision to accept the job -- and the bounty of benefits that accompanied it, from the weather to the lack of state income tax to Jacksonville's swell of Florida Gators fans -- an easy one.  ''They got the first pick, a chance to start fresh, start with some salary-cap advantages,'' Meyer said in an interview. ''Really, if you look at the team, there's some very good core players here.''  Khan, after having experimented (and failed) with various front office power-sharing models, reworked the organizational hierarchy to give Meyer maximum leeway and a big role in the general manager search.  N.F.L. owners have long been fascinated with innovative or triumphant college coaches, and although some flourished at the pro level, many, including Nick Saban and Steve Spurrier, struggled to adapt. In the N.F.L., recruiting prowess is neutralized. Motivational tactics that might work with 19- and 20-year-olds might not work on grown men. Roster limitations and the salary cap, intended to foster parity, wrest control from control freaks. So can injuries and meddlesome owners.  Spurrier was 56, same as Meyer now, when he -- regrettably, he says -- rushed into accepting a head coaching job in Washington, where he came to learn that the owner, Daniel Snyder, would be rather involved in personnel matters. In their first year together, in 2002, Snyder pushed Spurrier against his objections to play the rookie quarterback Patrick Ramsey, and the next year released the second-stringer Danny Wuerffel, who played for Spurrier at Florida. Unable to pick even his backup, Spurrier later told his wife, Jerri, that he'd be done after that season.  ''I was offered a bunch of money, and I did not use an agent, and I wasn't probably as careful as getting things in writing as I should have,'' Spurrier said. ''I did a poor job also, and I'll admit to that. But the situation ran me out.''  Neither Spurrier nor Saban -- nor any of their college brethren, really -- inherited a situation quite as favorable as Meyer's in Jacksonville, where he can develop a franchise quarterback while continuing to stockpile talent with four other 2021 draft selections in the top 65.  Khan's words might teem with optimism, but the Jaguars are still going to lose -- more often, perhaps, than Meyer, whose worst season as a college head coach was 8-5, ever has. Meyer's ability to cope with defeat may determine his longevity in the N.F.L.  ''That's the first thing I talked to him about when he took the job,'' Mullen said. ''I mean, 'How are you going to handle that?' Ten-and-six is a great year, and I don't know if he would ever view 10-6 as a great year.''  Meyer had far more success than the last two N.F.L. hires plucked from the college ranks, Matt Rhule (hired by the Panthers) and Kliff Kingsbury (Cardinals), but he recognizes that he must adapt on a number of fronts.  Already he seemed to misjudge the extent of the backlash generated by the hiring of a strength coach, Chris Doyle, who left Iowa's staff after several current and former players said he had promoted a culture of bullying and racism. Within hours of the Fritz Pollard Alliance's condemning the decision, calling it ''simply unacceptable,'' Doyle resigned.  Recruiting players is one of Meyer's strengths, but unlike in college, where he often had several face-to-face conversations with potential players, he didn't speak with any prospective free agents until after they signed. The Jaguars signed more than a dozen free agents, including several veterans who played for Meyer and his coaches, like running back Carlos Hyde, who said it was a ''no-brainer'' to rejoin him.  ''We've been lucky,'' Meyer said. ''A lot of guys are here training. But we haven't had a team meeting yet. In college, you probably would have had 50 by now.''  But as he is fast learning, Meyer is not in college anymore.  Eager to coach again, Urban Meyer found a fit with the lowly Jaguars, who are poised to draft Trevor Lawrence, top, on Thursday. (D1); The owner Shahid Khan, right, offered Meyer the chance to remake the team. ''Everybody gets that this isn't rebuilding,'' Khan said. ''I mean, we need to win now.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AGNES LOPEZ FOR THE new_york_times); Clemson's Trevor Lawrence, one of the best quarterback prospects in decades, worked out in February in front of Jaguars Coach Urban Meyer, center right, and attended the Masters in April. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN BAZEMORE/ASSOCIATED PRESS; DAVID PLATT/CLEMSON ATHLETICS/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS; DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times); The team's struggles make it impossible for fair-weather Jacksonville fans to exist, says the president of a supporters' club. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DUSTIN HEGEDUS) (D3)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0004a "
110		"   THE MEDIA EQUATION  A Look at Facebook's House Rules  By Ben Smith  1,731 words 26 April 2021   1     The New York Post has complained that Facebook is blocking and downplaying its stories. But the platform doesn't pay any special deference to journalists.  On Wednesday, I learned a new way to get a news article erased from much of the internet.  If the article shows your home or apartment, says what city you're in and you don't like it, you can complain to Facebook. Facebook will then ensure that nobody can share the article on its giant platform and, as a bonus, block you from sending it to anyone in Facebook Messenger.  I learned this rule from a cheerfully intense senior Facebook lawyer. The lawyer, who was supplied by Facebook's public relations department on the condition she could speak only anonymously to discuss a specific case, was trying to explain why the service had expunged a meanspirited New York Post article about a Black Lives Matter activist's real estate purchases.  ''The policy is superclear!'' the lawyer told me over a Zoom call from her bright home office. But, she added, ''I totally get why it sounds kind of crazy in this case.''  The policy sounds crazy because it could apply to dozens, if not hundreds, of news articles every day -- indeed, to a staple of reporting for generations that has included Michael Bloomberg's expansion of his townhouse in 2009 and the comings and goings of the Hamptons elites. Alex Rodriguez doesn't like a story that includes a photo of him and his former fiancée, Jennifer Lopez, smiling in front of his house? Delete it. Donald Trump is annoyed about a story that includes a photo of him outside his suite at Mar-a-Lago? Gone. Facebook's hands, the lawyer told me, are tied by its own policies.  Presumably, the only reason this doesn't happen constantly is because nobody knows about the policy. But now you do!  I learned about this policy while trying to understand a rarely discussed front in Facebook's rolling standoff with journalism: In cases of difficult news judgment, who decides what counts as news? Will Facebook defer to publishers' decisions on, for instance, which celebrity's home purchase is worth covering? Or will Facebook delete a publisher's link just as quickly as it deletes an individual's post that it has decided violated its rules?  The answer, the lawyer told me, is simple: Facebook alone decides. In the parts of its policy that are devoted to privacy and safety, Facebook doesn't pay any special deference to journalists and believes its ''policy'' team is better suited to make decisions. Facebook alone will balance competing values like newsworthiness against privacy, or the old print belief in transparency against the digital aversion to ''doxxing'' -- that is, publishing people's identifying information against their will. And in the standoff with The Post this month, all you can do is choose your fighter: Mark Zuckerberg or Rupert Murdoch.  Facebook's lawyer was earnestly explaining the policy to me to rebut The Post's accusation that it was being ''silenced'' because of its Trumpy right-wing politics. This keeps happening to The Post. Facebook also blocked an article speculating (as many others have) that the coronavirus could have leaked from a lab, and it ensured that The Post's reporting on emails from Hunter Biden couldn't be widely shared across the social network. Blocking the Covid-19 op-ed, a Facebook spokeswoman, Sally Aldous, said, was a ''bug.'' The company's action on the Hunter Biden story was the result of yet another policy, in which professional ''fact checkers'' -- mostly junior journalists -- have a week to rule on whether something is true or false while Facebook prevents a story from being shared widely. (The fact checkers were not, in this case, able to get to the bottom of an epically puzzling and messy story in a week.)  Facebook's usual critics have been strikingly silent as the company has extended its purview over speech into day-to-day editorial calls. ''We don't have anyone who is closely plugged into that situation right now so we don't have anything to say at this point in time,'' a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union, Aaron Madrid Aksoz, said in an email. The only criticism came from the News Media Alliance, the old newspaper lobby, whose chief executive, David Chavern, called blocking The Post's link ''completely arbitrary'' and noted that ''Facebook and Google stand between publishers and their audiences and determine how and whether news content is seen.''  The Post's editorial board wrote that Facebook and other social media companies ''claim to be 'neutral' and that they aren't making editorial decisions in a cynical bid to stave off regulation or legal accountability that threatens their profits. But they do act as publishers -- just very bad ones.''  Of course, it takes one to know one. The Post, always a mix of strong local news, great gossip and spun-up conservative politics, is making a bid for the title of worst newspaper in America right now. It has run a string of scary stories about Covid vaccines, the highlight of which was a headline linking vaccines to herpes, part of a broader attempt to extend its digital reach. Great stuff, if you're mining for traffic in anti-vax Telegram groups. The piece on the Black Lives Matter activist that Facebook blocked was pretty weak, too. It insinuated, without evidence, that her wealth was ill-gotten, and mostly just sneered at how ''the self-described Marxist last month purchased a $1.4 million home.''  But then, you've probably hate-read a story about a person you disliked buying an expensive house. When Lachlan Murdoch, the co-chairman of The Post's parent company, bought the most expensive house in Los Angeles, for instance, it received wide and occasionally sneering coverage. Maybe Mr. Murdoch didn't know he could get the stories deleted by Facebook.  Facebook doesn't keep a central register of news articles it expunges on these grounds, though the service did block a Daily Mail article about the Black Lives Matter activist's real estate as well. And it does not keep track of how many news articles it has blocked, though it regularly deletes offending posts by individuals, including photos of the home of the Fox News star Tucker Carlson, a Facebook employee said.  What Facebook's clash with The Post really revealed -- and what surprised me -- is that the platform does not defer, at all, to news organizations on questions of news judgment. A decision by The Post, or The new_york_times, that someone's personal wealth is newsworthy carries no weight in the company's opaque enforcement mechanisms. Nor, Facebook's lawyer said, does a more nebulous and reasonable human judgment that the country has felt on edge for the last year and that a Black activist's concern for her own safety was justified. (The activist didn't respond to my inquiry but, in an Instagram post, called the reporting on her personal finances ''doxxing'' and a ''tactic of terror.'')  The point of Facebook's bureaucracy is to replace human judgment with a kind of strict corporate law. ''The policy in this case prioritizes safety and privacy, and this enforcement shows how difficult these trade-offs can be,'' the company's vice president for communications, Tucker Bounds, said. ''To help us understand if our policies are in the right place, we are referring the policy to the Oversight Board.''  The board is a promising kind of supercourt that has yet to set much meaningful policy. So this rule could eventually change. (Get your stories deleted while you can!)  For now, though, the deletion seems to be an instance of how the company finds itself constantly debating the literal interpretation of its own, made-up rules rather than exercising any form of actual judgment. That came up again this spring in an internal report finding that Facebook hadn't cracked down on ''Stop the Steal'' splinter groups because they were all hovering below its ''violation threshold.''  I should note that when it comes to the article about the activist's house, Facebook waded into one of the trickiest areas of online speech, and one of the hardest calls for news organizations today. Journalists have always insisted on the right to print public information, which often includes things like home purchases and people's real names. We have that legal right in the United States. But the internet has pioneered new forms of harassment based on menacingly circulating a photograph of your home, or tying your private social media to your public social media, which are viewed as ''doxxing.''  These are hard calls without simple answers, and the social consensus is shifting. In 2012, for instance, I approved publishing an article that gave details about Mr. Zuckerberg's residence in San Francisco's Mission District, along with a candid photograph of him at a favorite deli. I'd probably leave out some of those details now, for some of the reasons I wouldn't publish that Post article about the activist. The internet has gotten darker, and alongside substantive safety concerns, doxxing is an ugly and ubiquitous form of harassment.  There's something depressing about an internet in which you're left choosing between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Murdoch, as the Electronic Frontier Foundation's director of strategy, Danny O'Brien, pointed out to me. It didn't have to be that way.  ''We've been thrown into a situation where all you can do is pick your billionaire monopolist,'' Mr. O'Brien said, lamenting ''a world in which you get to pick your gatekeeper, rather than the world we were promised -- and which technology offers -- of not picking a gatekeeper at all.''  But in this time of media consolidation, it seems healthy to decentralize decision-making where you can. At present, Mr. Zuckerberg is making every call, or instituting a new quasi-legal code that reduces journalists to mall cops, enforcing Facebook's rules rather than acting on news judgment. Better that professional editors, with diverse and conflicting views, make their differing calls. That inevitably includes Mr. Murdoch's editors.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Koren Shadmi FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003c "
111		"    Foreign Domestic Workers In Persian Gulf Countries Use TikTok to Vent Woes  By Louise Donovan  1,481 words 26 April 2021   11     Foreign employees in wealthy households -- most of them women -- have been using the video-sharing app to bring abuses to light.  The young Kenyan housekeeper, dressed in a crisp uniform and a head scarf, nods her head from side to side to the beat of a tune in her video, an expression of mock exasperation on her face as she stares into the camera and mimes the refrain: ''Don't got it.''  Words like freedom and respect pop up on the screen, and the worker, Brenda Dama, 26, swats them away one by one. A single day off? ''Don't got it.'' A peaceful life without quarrels or insults? ''Don't got it.''  Ms. Dama's post on the video-sharing app TikTok, a parody of the song ''Renee'' by the American indie rock duo Sales, vents about the stresses of her job as a house cleaner for a family in Saudi Arabia, where she has worked since leaving her native Kenya in 2019. One of several videos of hers that have spread widely on the platform, it has amassed more than 900,000 views and nearly 6,000 comments since it was posted in August.  Far from home and in unfamiliar settings, domestic workers in the Gulf, like Ms. Dama -- the vast majority of them women -- have long used social media to keep in touch with friends and family. As the popularity of TikTok exploded last year, they have increasingly turned to the platform to open up about their lives and working conditions -- many of them saying they are overworked, sexually harassed and targets of discrimination.  ''Here, it is really tough,'' Ms. Dama said in a telephone interview from Saudi Arabia. ''You end up crying every day. But when you see the positive comments on your videos, you're like, oh, this person understands.''  The oil-rich monarchies of the Persian Gulf depend on migrant laborers from Africa, Asia and poorer Arab countries to keep the machinery of daily life running -- millions of housekeepers, construction workers, delivery workers, garbage collectors, guards, hairdressers and more. Those workers often outnumber the native population.  As of 2016, there were nearly four million foreign domestic workers in the Gulf, according to a study by Abu Dhabi Dialogue, a forum on migrant labor, and the number has most likely risen since. Before the pandemic, an estimated 36,000 new domestic workers headed to the region each year, according to the forum.  Most foreign domestic workers in the Gulf are employed through a sponsorship system that gives their employers almost total control over them. They are unable to change jobs or leave the country without permission from their employer, and their bosses often confiscate their mobile phones and passports.  Female domestic workers, who are often isolated, are particularly vulnerable to abuse, according to rights groups.  With their already minimal freedoms further diminished by the pandemic and their isolation growing, the domestic workers are unflinchingly using TikTok to tell the world how they are being treated even though it could be dangerous to do so.  Some women use the posts simply to blow off steam. Others are seeking to spread the word of their often dire working conditions, frequently with a fatalistic sense of humor. Their audience, many of them also foreign workers, say that scrolling through funny videos is a way to ease loneliness and can provide a brief respite from stress, anxiety or depression.  ''Many here are suffering,'' said Merygene Cajoto, 35, a Filipino worker in Saudi Arabia who posts to more than 18,000 followers. ''The way they express their depression, their stress from their work, is through TikTok. Friends send me videos and advice. It's a kind of help line.''  Ms. Dama started posting on TikTok about a year ago, documenting the travails of workers like her in the Middle East. Before the ''Don't Got It'' video went viral, she had fewer than 20,000 followers. After it came out, that number jumped by about 5,000 within days, and she now has more than 32,000.  Her videos, often tinged with sarcasm, dissect some of the weighty problems facing domestic laborers in the Gulf.  In another video, Ms. Dama dons a head scarf to mimic her Saudi employer. Her boss accused her of stealing money because she ''comes from poverty back home,'' according to Ms. Dama.  While it's difficult to determine exact numbers of domestic workers using TikTok, Marie Kretz Di Meglio of Uplifters, a Hong Kong-based nonprofit that offers online education to migrant workers, said she had noticed an increase after the pandemic started.  ''All of a sudden, they were all using it,'' she said.  Many of the workers use humor or dramatization to present the difficulties of their day-to-day lives.  Last year, Nieza Tunacao, 27, created a scripted series in which she acts out problems faced by housekeepers. She titled it ''OFW Diaries'' -- a common abbreviation for overseas Filipino workers.  She films fast-paced vignettes, often set to melancholy piano music, in her room. In one, she depicts an employer confiscating a worker's phone, while in another her family is relieved when she is finally able to call home. She posts them to her 1.2 million followers.  After moving to Kuwait in 2018, Ms. Tunacao said, she forged virtual friendships with many domestic workers on TikTok. Each episode in the series is based on their real experiences and her own.  ''When overseas workers see my videos, they smile. They can relate. They say I am their happy pill,'' she said in a telephone interview, laughing.  Many on the app have created educational videos explaining to followers how recruitment agencies and contracts work and encouraging those working in the region to share their experiences.  In some instances, women risk not only their jobs by posting on TikTok, but also their safety.  Sandigan, a Kuwait-based organization that campaigns for domestic workers' rights, was contacted by about 70 women seeking help for problems related to posts on TikTok and Facebook Live since late 2019, according to Ann Abunda, a founder of the group. Most had been reprimanded by employers and were asking for guidance, and a few had been deported, she said.  In some parts of the Middle East, taking pictures or videos inside an employer's home, particularly of children, and posting them online without permission could lead to criminal charges or deportation.  ''They're showing private moments to the public,'' Ms. Abunda said. ''They need to be careful.''  Both Ms. Cajoto and Ms. Tunacao said that their employers were aware of their videos and tolerated them, knowledge that provided a degree of job security and safety from physical harm. But for many other low-paid housekeepers working in foreign countries, life is not as secure.  In recent years, a number of countries have passed domestic-worker labor laws. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia stipulate that employees are obliged to protect the secrets of their households. Such workers will often be asked to sign employment contracts with similar wording on arrival in the country of employment.  Because the language is broad, the contracts and labor laws can be used against domestic workers who have minimal power, said Rothna Begum, a senior women's rights researcher for the Middle East and North Africa at Human Rights Watch.  For Ms. Dama, things took a turn for the worse last year. Early one July afternoon, she said, she headed to her employer's empty veranda during her break to record a TikTok video. While she was in the middle of filming it, her employer walked past.  ''My madam acted shocked,'' and asked me '''What are you doing? You're here to work,''' Ms. Dama said. ''She could act rudely sometimes, but after she was shown my TikTok videos, it became worse. She could insult me like an animal -- like I was not even a human.''  Two months later, Ms. Dama left to work elsewhere.  As her ''Don't got it'' video grew in popularity, she also started to receive a torrent of online abuse. Commenters from the region accused her of lying and told her to go back to her country.  The bullying is tough, she said. But she refuses to delete her videos, because domestic workers frequently flood her profile with messages of support. When she feels loneliness creeping back in, she said, their words keep her strong.  ''You feel like you have company,'' she said. ''Our phones are our best friends.''  This article is a collaboration between The new_york_times and The Fuller Project, a nonprofit newsroom that reports on global issues affecting women.  A still from a video posted on TikTok by Brenda Dama. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Brenda Dama, via TikTok FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003r "
112		"    Supply Issues And Side Effects Deter Millions From 2nd Shot  By Rebecca Robbins  1,870 words 26 April 2021   1     Millions of Americans are not getting the second doses of their Covid-19 vaccines, and their ranks are growing.  More than five million people, or nearly 8 percent of those who got a first shot of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines, have missed their second doses, according to the most recent data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That is more than double the rate among people who got inoculated in the first several weeks of the nationwide vaccine campaign.  Even as the country wrestles with the problem of millions of people who are wary about getting vaccinated at all, local health authorities are confronting an emerging challenge of ensuring that those who do get inoculated are doing so fully.  The reasons vary for why people are missing their second shots. In interviews, some said they feared the side effects, which can include flulike symptoms. Others said they felt that they were sufficiently protected with a single shot.  Those attitudes were expected, but another hurdle has been surprisingly prevalent. A number of vaccine providers have canceled second-dose appointments because they ran out of supply or didn't have the right brand in stock.  Walgreens, one of the biggest vaccine providers, sent some people who got a first shot of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine to get their second doses at pharmacies that only had the other vaccine on hand.  Several Walgreens customers said in interviews that they scrambled, in some cases with help from pharmacy staff, to find somewhere to get the correct second dose. Others, presumably, simply gave up.  From the outset, public health experts worried that it would be difficult to get everyone to return for a second shot three or four weeks after the first dose. It is no surprise that, as vaccines are rolled out more broadly, the numbers of those skipping their second dose have gone up.  But the trend is nonetheless troubling some state officials, who are rushing to keep the numbers of only partly vaccinated people from swelling.  In Arkansas and Illinois, health officials have directed teams to call, text or send letters to people to remind them to get their second shots. In Pennsylvania, officials are trying to ensure that college students can get their second shots after they leave campus for the summer. South Carolina has allocated several thousand doses specifically for people who are overdue for their second shot.  Mounting evidence collected in trials and from real-world immunization campaigns points to the peril of people skipping their second doses. Compared with the two-dose regimen, a single shot triggers a weaker immune response and may leave recipients more susceptible to dangerous virus variants. And even though a single dose provides partial protection against Covid, it's not clear how long that protection will last.  ''I'm very worried, because you need that second dose,'' said Dr. Paul Offit, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania and a member of the Food and Drug Administration's vaccine advisory panel.  The stakes are high because there is only one vaccine authorized in the United States that is given as a single shot. The use of that vaccine, made by Johnson & Johnson, was paused this month after it was linked to a very rare but serious side effect involving blood clotting. Federal health officials on Friday recommended restarting use of the vaccine, but the combination of the safety scare and ongoing production problems is likely to make that vaccine a viable option for fewer people.  The C.D.C.'s count of missed second doses is through April 9. It covers only people who got a first Moderna dose by March 7 or a first Pfizer dose by March 14.  While millions of people have missed their second shots, the overall rates of follow-through, with some 92 percent getting fully vaccinated, are strong by historical standards. Roughly three-quarters of adults come back for their second dose of the vaccine that protects against shingles.  In some cases, problems with shipments or scheduling may be playing a role in people missing their second doses. Some vaccine providers have had to cancel appointments because they did not receive expected vaccine deliveries. People have also reported having their second-dose appointments canceled or showing up only to find out that there were no doses available of the brand they needed.  Some people can be flexible about being rebooked. But that's harder for people who lack access to reliable transportation or who have jobs with strictly scheduled hours, said Elena Cyrus, an infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Central Florida.  Walgreens booked some customers for their second appointments at places that didn't have the same vaccine that they had received for their initial doses. The company said it fixed the problem in late March.  Susan Ruel, 67, was scheduled to get her two vaccine doses at different Walgreens stores in Manhattan. She said she got her first Pfizer dose without incident in February, but when she arrived for her second appointment, she was told that the store only had Moderna doses in stock.  A Walgreens pharmacist told Ms. Ruel that there was another Walgreens pharmacy less than two miles away with Pfizer doses in stock. While Ms. Ruel was waiting for the subway to take her there, she got a phone call: That Walgreens store had run out of Pfizer doses, too.  Ms. Ruel managed to get the Pfizer dose at yet another Walgreens the next day. But she said many people in her situation probably wouldn't have tried so hard. ''All you need is hassles like this,'' she said.  In the Chicago area, for example, pharmacists at two Walgreens locations said the problem was causing headaches. They said that Walgreens' appointment system was sending each pharmacy anywhere from 10 to 20 customers a week who need a second Pfizer shot, even though both pharmacies stock only the Moderna vaccine.  It is not clear how widespread the Walgreens dose-matching problem has been or how many people have missed their second doses because of it.  Jim Cohn, a spokesman for Walgreens, said that the problem affected ''a small percentage'' of people who had booked their appointments online and that the company contacted them to reschedule ''in alignment with our vaccine availability.'' He said that nearly 95 percent of people who got their first shot at Walgreens have also received their second shots from the company.  Walgreens has also come under fire for, until recently, scheduling second doses of the Pfizer vaccine four weeks after the first shot, rather than the three-week gap recommended by the C.D.C. Pharmacists have been besieged by customers complaining, including about their inability to book vaccine appointments online.  In other cases, though, access to vaccines is not the sole barrier; people's attitudes contribute, too.  Basith Syed, a 24-year-old consultant in Chicago, nabbed a leftover Moderna vaccine at a Walgreens in mid-February. But when the time came for his second shot, he was busy at work and preparing for his wedding. After the first shot, he had spent two days feeling drained. He didn't want to risk a repeat, and he felt confident that a single dose would protect him.  ''I didn't really feel the urgency to get that second dose,'' Mr. Syed said.  By early April, his schedule had calmed down a little, and he went looking for a second Moderna shot. But by then, the Walgreens where he had gotten his first shot was only offering Pfizer shots. He couldn't find slots at other Walgreens stores. Mr. Syed is no longer actively looking for a second shot, though he still hopes to eventually get one.  .  The C.D.C. says there is limited data on the vaccine's effectiveness when shots are separated by more than six weeks, although some countries, including Britain and Canada, are giving shots with a gap of up to three or four months.  Mr. Syed's experience is part of a broader shift in Illinois. When vaccines were mostly being given to health care workers, residents of long-term care facilities and people over 65, almost everyone was getting their second shots. In recent weeks, though, the number dipped below 90 percent, though it has since rebounded slightly, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health.  In Arkansas, about 84,000 people have missed their second shots, representing 11 percent of those eligible for those shots, said Dr. Jennifer Dillaha, the state epidemiologist. Workers recently began calling people who are due or overdue for their second shots.  College students pose a particular challenge. Many recently became eligible to be vaccinated and are getting their first shots, but they will have left campus by the time they are due for their second doses.  In Pennsylvania, health officials have instructed vaccine providers to give second doses to college students even if they did not receive their first doses from that location.  Some vaccine providers have put on special clinics for people who need a second dose. In South Carolina, the health system Tidelands Health started a program specifically for people who received their first Pfizer doses more than 23 days earlier but hadn't been able to find a second shot. The state health department sent the health system 2,340 doses for the effort.  Demand has been strong, and Tidelands only has a few hundred doses left. The majority of takers have been people who ''were having difficulty navigating all the various scheduling systems and providers,'' said Gayle Resetar, the health system's chief operating officer.  In many cases, vaccine providers had canceled second-dose appointments because of bad winter weather. ''It was up to the individual to reschedule themselves on a web portal or web platform, and that just became difficult for people,'' Ms. Resetar said.  There are rare cases in which people are supposed to forgo the second shot, such as if they had an allergic reaction after their first shot.  Zvi Ish-Shalom, a religious studies professor from Boulder, Colo., had planned to get fully vaccinated. Then, an hour after his first shot of the Moderna vaccine, he developed a headache that hasn't gone away more than a month later.  There is no way to know for sure whether the vaccine triggered the headache. But after weighing what he saw as the risks and benefits of a second dose, Dr. Ish-Shalom reached a decision about how to proceed.  ''At this point in time, I feel very clear and very comfortable, given all the various elements of this equation, to forgo the second shot,'' he said.  Zvi Ish-Shalom. a religious studies professor. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHET STRANGE FOR THE new_york_times) (B1); Pharmacists vaccinated patients in Little Rock, Ark., in March. Left, Basith Syed, of Chicago, said that after the first shot, he spent two days feeling drained. ''I didn't really feel the urgency to get that second dose.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RORY DOYLE FOR THE new_york_times; LYNDON FRENCH FOR THE new_york_times) (B4)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00042 "
113		"    E.U. Is Nearly Ready to Let Vaccinated American Tourists Visit This Summer  By Matina Stevis-Gridneff  1,079 words 26 April 2021   6     The head of the European Commission said the bloc would switch policy, under certain conditions, after more than a year of mostly banning nonessential travel.  BRUSSELS -- American tourists who have been fully vaccinated against Covid-19 will be able to visit the European Union over the summer, the head of the bloc's executive body said in an interview with The new_york_times on Sunday, more than a year after shutting down nonessential travel from most countries to limit the spread of the coronavirus.  The fast pace of vaccination in the United States, and advanced talks between authorities there and the European Union over how to make vaccine certificates acceptable as proof of immunity for visitors, will enable the European Commission, the executive branch of the European Union, to recommend a switch in policy that could see trans-Atlantic leisure travel restored.  ''The Americans, as far as I can see, use European Medicines Agency-approved vaccines,'' Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said Sunday in an interview with The Times in Brussels. ''This will enable free movement and the travel to the European Union.  ''Because one thing is clear: All 27 member states will accept, unconditionally, all those who are vaccinated with vaccines that are approved by E.M.A.,'' she added. The agency, the bloc's drugs regulator, has approved all three vaccines being used in the United States, namely the Moderna, Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson & Johnson shots.  Ms. von der Leyen did not offer a timeline on when exactly tourist travel might open up or details on how it would occur. But her comments are a top-level statement that the current travel restrictions are set to change on the basis of vaccination certificates.  She noted that the United States was ''on track'' and making ''huge progress'' with its campaign to reach so-called herd immunity, or the vaccination of 70 percent of adults, by mid-June.  She added that resumption of travel would depend ''on the epidemiological situation, but the situation is improving in the United States, as it is, hopefully, also improving in the European Union.''  Diplomats from Europe's tourist destination countries, mostly led by Greece, have argued for weeks that the bloc's criteria for determining whether a country is a ''safe'' origin purely based on low cases of Covid-19 are fast becoming irrelevant given the progress of vaccination campaigns in the United States, Britain and some other countries.  Technical discussions have been going on for several weeks between European Union and United States officials on how to practically and technologically make vaccine certificates from each place broadly readable so that citizens can use them to travel without restrictions.  These discussions are continuing, officials in Brussels said, and it is possible that a low-tech solution would be used in the near future to enable people to travel freely on the basis of vaccination. For example, a traveler to Europe could get an E.U. vaccine-certificate equivalent on arrival after showing a bona fide certificate issued by his or her own government.  The hope, officials said, is that this step would soon be unnecessary as government-issued vaccine certificates issued by foreign governments would be acceptable and readable in the European Union, and vice versa.  The European Union itself has begun the process of furnishing its own citizens with ''digital green certificates,'' which will state whether the traveler has been vaccinated against Covid-19; has recovered from the disease in recent months; or has tested negative for the virus in the past few days. Europeans will be able to use those to travel without added restrictions, at least in principle, within the bloc of 27 nations.  Based on Ms. von der Leyen's comments, the European Commission will recommend the change in travel policy, though individual member states may reserve the right to keep stricter limits. They might not permit citizens from outside the bloc to visit or might enforce restrictions like quarantines, even on visitors who have vaccination certificates.  But countries like Greece, Spain, Italy, Portugal and Croatia that welcome millions of American tourists each summer, and greatly depend on them for income and jobs, are set to jump at the opportunity to reopen to the American tourism market with the E.U.'s blessing.  Until now, nonessential travel to the European Union has been officially banned with the exception of visitors from a short list of countries with very low caseloads of the virus, including Australia, New Zealand and South Korea.  Some E.U. countries have made small exceptions to permit visitors from outside the bloc. Greece, for example, said last week that it would open its borders to travelers from the United States starting Monday, provided they show proof of vaccination or a negative coronavirus test.  The visitors from the handful of countries that are officially permitted to visit the European Union under existing rules would normally still have to comply with various sets of requirements implemented on a country-by-country basis, including having a negative coronavirus test and following quarantine rules.  The return of vaccinated visitors to Europe's beaches and tourist sites would bring a desperately needed financial boost for countries in its southern rim, in particular. And for millions of would-be tourists around the world, as well as for airlines and the broader travel industry, it would herald a cautious and limited return to something that feels like normalcy.  For Americans especially, it would also highlight a stark change in Covid-19 fortunes: going from undesirable in Europe a year ago, when the pandemic was raging in the United States, to being in the front of the line of global travelers free to resume leisure trips.  But the return of leisure travel to Europe on a bigger scale will also highlight the deepening inequality between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated, both within countries and, particularly, on a global level. With India in the throes of the worst rise in coronavirus infections in the world, and with the past week's global case total the highest since the pandemic began, that contrast could become even more jarring.  Before long American tourists may be able to visit Paris and the treasures of the Louvre, shown last summer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Dmitry Kostyukov for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00043 "
114		"    Gunfire Erupts in Somalia as Political Feud Turns Violent  By Declan Walsh and Hussein Mohamed  945 words 26 April 2021   9     Tensions had been rising since the president, a former American citizen, failed to hold scheduled elections, then extended his term in office by two years.  NAIROBI, Kenya -- Gunfire erupted across the Somali capital, Mogadishu, on Sunday as security forces loyal to the president clashed with units that appeared to have sided with his rivals, stoking fears that Somalia's simmering political crisis is spilling over into violence.  The fighting, some of the worst in the Somali capital for years, followed months of tense talks between President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed and opponents who accuse him of making an unconstitutional power grab.  The talks collapsed after Mr. Mohamed failed to hold presidential and parliamentary elections by February, as scheduled, and then two months later signed a law extending his term in office by two years. His actions have drawn criticism from the United States and other Western allies.  The moves effectively ended United Nations-mediated negotiations backed by the United States and added fuel to an already combustible political situation.  The shooting started Sunday afternoon after soldiers aligned with the opposition took positions at several strategic locations in Mogadishu, drawing fire from pro-government forces. Analysts said the rift was influenced by the powerful clan divisions that have often been at the center of the turmoil Somalia has faced since its central government collapsed in 1991.  As rival factions traded fire late into Sunday evening, alarmed Western officials appealed for a halt to fighting they feared might spiral into a wider confrontation that could unravel years of modest yet steady progress toward turning Somalia into a functioning state.  The European Union ambassador to Somalia, Nicolas Berlanga, appealed on Twitter for ''maximum restraint'' on all sides. ''Violence is unacceptable,'' he said. ''Those responsible will be held accountable.''  The fighting also raised the possibility of dangerous fissures along clan lines inside the Somali military, and the worry that powerful foreign-trained units, including an elite American-funded commando squad, could get sucked in.  Videos posted online by Somali reporters and news outlets Sunday night depicted long bursts of gunfire around Kilometer 4, a major junction in the city. Some of fighting occurred near Villa Somalia, as the presidential palace is known.  Foreigners living in the highly protected zone around Mogadishu's international airport said they had retreated into bunkers to avoid being hit by stray gunfire.  The main clashes occurred outside the homes of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, a former president of Somalia, and Abdirahman Abdishakur Warsame, the leader of a major opposition party. In statements, both men laid blame for the attacks on President Mohamed, who is popularly known by the nickname ''Formaajo.''  At a hastily convened news conference, Hassan Hundubey Jimale, Somalia's minister of internal security, denied that the government had attacked the former president's home and blamed unspecified foreign countries for the clashes.  Mr. Jimale gave no details about how many people had been killed or injured.  Critics said Mr. Mohamed was making a high-stakes bid to stay in power.  ''It seems Formaajo has decided his final suicidal attack by attacking every opposition figure in town,'' said Hussein Sheikh Ali, a former national security adviser who once worked under Mr. Mohamed.  American officials said they had privately warned Mr. Mohamed, a one-time American citizen, against using the Danab, an American-trained commando force of about 900 soldiers, to crack down on his opponents. But they acknowledged that Mr. Mohamed has other options, including Turkish-trained troops estimated to number at least 2,600 men.  A contingent of troops trained in Eritrea, whose authoritarian leader, Isaias Afwerki, is a key ally of Mr. Mohamed, are reported to have returned to Somalia in recent weeks.  The election in 2017 of Mr. Mohamed, a former New York State official with a home in Buffalo, raised hopes he could set the country on a less corrupt and dysfunctional track. But disillusionment set in as Mr. Mohamed's government silenced critics, expelled the top U.N. official and, last year, dragged its feet over scheduled elections.  The opposition has refused to recognize Mr. Mohamed's authority since his four-year term expired on Feb. 8 without planned presidential and parliamentary elections taking place.  Talks between the two sides over the terms of any elections have been deadlocked since the fall. Opponents accused Mr. Mohamed and his powerful spy chief, Fahad Yasin, of attempting to rig the system by stuffing regional electoral boards with their supporters.  Mr. Mohamed claimed his enemies were trying to shy away from an election, and now says he needs two years to bring forward plans for universal suffrage in Somalia. Under the current system, the president is chosen through an indirect, clan-based vote.  Mr. Mohamed's move to extend his term by two years on April 14, which some analysts called a ''constitutional coup,'' met with fierce criticism from the United States and other Western allies.  In Mogadishu, the move caused some opposition leaders to retreat into their clan strongholds.  Among those embroiled in the fighting on Sunday was Sadek John, a former police chief of Mogadishu who was dismissed in mid-April after he opposed Mr. Mohamed, according to a Somali police official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the press.  Declan Walsh reported from Nairobi, Kenya and Hussein Mohamed from Mogadishu, Somalia.  A supporter of the opposition in Mogadishu. Fighting on Sunday raised fears that Somalia's political crisis could spill over into violence. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Feisal Omar/Reuters FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003y "
115		"    2021 Winners  By Gabe Cohn  367 words 26 April 2021   2     The complete list of winners for the 93rd Academy Awards.  The Academy Awards looked different this year: The red carpet was hemmed, and the after-parties were cut.  The ceremony was held almost two months later than usual, at an in-person event split between the Dolby Theater in Hollywood and Union Station in downtown Los Angeles. It was an unusual setup in an unusual year, where many of the films were released while movie theaters were largely closed because of the coronavirus pandemic.  Nevertheless, this ceremony made some history. Chloé Zhao won the best director for ''Nomadland,'' becoming the first woman of color to win the award, and the second woman ever to win. (Kathryn Bigelow was the first, for ''The Hurt Locker.'') Yuh-Jung Youn became the first Korean actress to win an acting Oscar, for her supporting role in ''Minari.''  Daniel Kaluuya won the best supporting actor award for his portrayal of Fred Hampton in ''Judas and the Black Messiah.'' Frances McDormand (''Nomadland'') won a third best-actress Oscar, and Anthony Hopkins (''The Father'') won for best actor over the late Chadwick Boseman, who had been heavily favored. ''Nomadland'' won best picture.  See below for a full list of winners.  Best Picture  ''Nomadland''  Best Director  Chloé Zhao, ''Nomadland''  Best Actor  Anthony Hopkins, ''The Father''  Best Actress  Frances McDormand, ''Nomadland''  Best Supporting Actor  Daniel Kaluuya, ''Judas and the Black Messiah''  Best Supporting Actress  Yuh-Jung Youn, ''Minari''  Original Screenplay  Emerald Fennell, ''Promising Young Woman''  Adapted Screenplay  Christopher Hampton and Florian Zeller, ''The Father''  Animated Feature  ''Soul''  Production Design  ''Mank''  Costume Design  ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom''  Cinematography  Erik Messerschmidt, ''Mank''  Editing  ''Sound of Metal''  Makeup and Hairstyling  ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom''  Sound  ''Sound of Metal''  Visual Effects  ''Tenet''  Score  Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross and Jon Batiste, ''Soul''  Song  ''Fight for You'' (''Judas and the Black Messiah'')  Documentary Feature  ''My Octopus Teacher''  International Feature  ''Another Round,'' Denmark  Animated Short  ''If Anything Happens I Love You''  Documentary Short  ''Colette''  Live-Action Short  ''Two Distant Strangers''  Frances McDormand won the Oscar for best actress for her performance in ''Nomadland.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABC FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003t "
116		"    Cruise Companies Fight Against 'Burdensome' C.D.C. Sailing Regulations  By Ceylan Yeginsu  1,645 words 26 April 2021   5     Cruise companies and their allies are fighting against rules that have kept U.S. ships from sailing. But experts say controlling the coronavirus onboard is a complex puzzle.  In the United States, flights are filling up, hotels are getting booked, vacation rentals are selling out and car rental companies are facing a shortage because of spiking demand.  But one sector remains stalled: the cruise industry.  Cruise ships sailing out of United States ports have been docked for more than a year following a series of outbreaks of the coronavirus onboard vessels at the start of the pandemic. Now, cruise companies can restart operations only by following rules laid out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in October.  Earlier this month, the C.D.C. published a set of technical guidelines to help cruise companies prepare their ships to start sailing again in line with those rules, which were set out in the agency's Framework for Conditional Sailing Order. But the Cruise Lines International Association (CLIA), the industry's trade group, called the instructions ''so burdensome and ambiguous that no clear path forward or timetable can be discerned.''  Cruise companies have asked the agency to revise its guidelines to factor in the speedy rollout of vaccinations and allow for U.S. sailings to restart in July. But the C.D.C. has not yet provided a firm date, and under the current rules, cruise ships must follow a monthslong process that includes simulation voyages to test out their health and safety protocols, followed by a review period.  ''The cruise industry as a whole is very frustrated,'' said Stewart Chiron, a cruise industry analyst and chief executive of the news site cruiseguy.com. ''Travel is resuming at a very high level. Airplanes and hotels are packed, and no industry is better suited to restart than cruising. The lines are prepared, safety protocols are in place and now, with the high level of vaccine distribution, they feel it's a good time to resume operations.''  In response to the C.D.C.'s delay of U.S. sailings, some cruise lines are moving their ships abroad to launch summer cruises from foreign ports, including from the Caribbean and Europe, where they are permitted to sail. Many of the voyages require adult passengers and crew members to be vaccinated.  Carnival, the world's largest cruise company, has warned that it might also look outside the United States if the C.D.C. continues to prevent cruises from sailing domestically.  CLIA paints the C.D.C. as targeting the industry unfairly, and points to the global economic impact of the initial suspension of cruise operations from mid-March to September of last year, the latest period for which it has statistics. The group says there was a loss of $50 billion in economic activity, 334,000 jobs and $15 billion in wages.  But health experts note the number and severity of outbreaks on ships last year when, for example, more than 700 people became infected with the virus on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan and 14 people died. ''The C.D.C. wants to prevent people from getting sick and the cruise lines want to go back to business and start making money,'' said Tara Kirk Sell, an assistant professor at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. ''So there's going to be a central disconnect and tension there as we sort our way through this pandemic, which isn't over yet, and we are still trying to figure out.''  Florida joins the fight  The state of Florida is home to PortMiami, the world's busiest cruise port, and it probably has the most to lose if cruise companies shift more sailings to the nearby Caribbean.  Earlier this month, Senators Rick Scott and Marco Rubio of Florida (both Republicans), along with Senator Dan Sullivan of Alaska (also Republican), introduced the Cruise Act bill that, if passed, would revoke the agency's Conditional Sail Order and require it to issue new guidance to restart United States sailings. (Because of a quirk of maritime law, several major cruise lines have canceled all 2021 sailings to Alaska.)  ''With the way this is going, it seems that the C.D.C. doesn't want the cruise industry to be in business because they are not setting the rules in a manner that the cruise industry feels they can comply and safely return to work,'' Senator Scott said in a telephone interview.  ''Cruise lines clearly want their passengers and employees to be safe,'' he continued. ''They have been working all year to prepare their ships, but the C.D.C. has been very difficult to work with and if they don't want to help then we'll make sure they do it because we are going to pass this legislation.''  The state of Florida has sued the federal government to demand cruise ships be allowed to start sailing immediately.  Gov. Ron DeSantis, also a Republican, has maintained that the cruise ban has had a disproportionate impact on the state's economy; cruises usually generates billions of dollars from the millions of passengers that pass through Florida's ports each year.  ''People are going to cruise one way or another. The question is are we going to do it out of Florida, which is the number one place to do it in the world, or are they going to be doing it out of the Bahamas or other locations?'' Gov. DeSantis said, speaking at a recent news conference at PortMiami.  Ms. Sell said she thinks the C.D.C.'s phased approach, where safety protocols are tested out before passengers are allowed back on onboard, is the right one.  ''Cruises have for a long time had a potential to super spread diseases that include Covid because people are often in close quarters,'' she said. ''I'm not saying that you could never do cruises again, but that it just needs to be something where you sort through all the requirements.''  Battle over vaccinations  Ms. Sell, and other health experts say that requiring everyone onboard to be vaccinated against the coronavirus is one of the best ways to prevent outbreaks. Several cruise lines have made vaccinations a requirement for smaller U.S. river cruises and foreign sailings.  But while Gov. DeSantis is arguing for cruises to restart, he has also issued an executive order banning Florida businesses from requiring proof of vaccination from people seeking to use their services. The governor's office said that the order prohibits all cruise lines from requiring vaccine certificates for their Florida operations.  The C.D.C. recommended vaccinations in its latest technical guidance, but stopped short of making them a requirement, avoiding a conflict with Florida.  Requiring vaccinations appeals to at least some would-be cruisers. ''I'm really excited to get back on a cruise, but I don't think I could fully relax and enjoy it if everyone on board wasn't vaccinated,'' said Molly Osborne, an avid cruiser based in South Florida. ''It would be a great shame if we had to travel to other U.S. ports to get on a ship. Florida is the cruising capital of the world.''  Still, Ms. Osborne said she is open to traveling abroad to get on a cruise if the C.D.C. doesn't lift its ban by the fall. ''I haven't booked anything yet as I'm waiting to see what happens, but if the only way to go this year is from the Caribbean, then I'll probably do it.''  White House meeting  Experts from the C.D.C. and White House staff met with cruise line executives and industry leaders last week to discuss the details of the Conditional Sailing Order.  ''The objective of the meetings are to mutually review the top priority issues of the cruise industry to work out implementation details of the CSO, including the impact of vaccines and other scientific developments since the CSO was issued in October 2020,'' the agency said in a statement. ''This goal aligns with the desire for the resumption of passenger operations in the United States by midsummer, expressed by many major cruise ship operators and travelers.''  In the meantime, cruise lines are focusing on launching summer sailings abroad in Europe, Asia and the Caribbean. MSC Cruises, the industry's fourth-largest operator, announced on Thursday that it would be canceling all U.S. cruises through June 30 and instead plans to have at least 10 ships sailing out of Europe and the Mediterranean by August. Royal Caribbean, the second-largest by passenger count, is sailing out of the Bahamas and Bermuda, among other places, and is requiring vaccinations for all crew and passengers.  Before vaccines were being widely distributed, cruises lines operating in Europe reported some Covid infections on board, but say that the cases were brought under control using stringent health and safety protocols, which prevented any larger outbreaks.  The C.D.C.'s advisory regarding cruise travel remains at a Level 4, the highest, and the agency recommends that all people avoid travel on cruise ships, including river cruises, worldwide.  ''That's because the chance of getting Covid-19 on cruise ships is high since the virus appears to spread more easily between people in close quarters aboard ships,'' the warning says.  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places list for 2021 .  Royal Caribbean has scheduled cruises out of Bermuda and the Bahamas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002z "
117		"    Unmasked, But Still Muffled, TV  By Mike Hale  1,064 words 26 April 2021   1     A stripped-down ceremony stripped out too much of what makes the show, for better or worse, worth watching.  The producers of the 2021 Oscars had said that they planned to make the annual telecast more like a film. They didn't succeed at that, but they did change things up. Sunday's broadcast on ABC was more like a cross between the Golden Globes and the closing-night banquet of a long, exhausting convention.  The challenges were great. The ceremony had to celebrate an industry that was already going through wrenching change before the pandemic brought it completely to its knees. And it had to do it in a Covid-19-safe manner (while continually pointing out that it was doing so).  The solutions the producers Jesse Collins, Stacey Sher and Steven Soderbergh came up with included moving the ceremony from the crowded seats of the Dolby Theater to a tiered stage constructed in Los Angeles's Union Station, where nominees and a few invited, vaccinated guests sat maskless at widely spaced tables. Winners walked a few steps and up a treacherous ramp to a small dais; presenters (the show was hostless for the third straight year) often spoke from among the nominees.  There were charms to this arrangement. It was a nice change to see the nominees with a few people they actually cared about (or felt absolutely obligated to invite), rather than the largely anonymous studio-invited claques we're used to.  The trade-off -- whether because of the smaller crowd, the social distancing, or the sound quality in the cavernous space -- was what felt like a dead room, both acoustically and emotionally. There were powerful and moving speeches, but they didn't seem to be generating much excitement, and when the people in the room aren't excited, it's hard to get excited at home.  The other major change in the production -- and this one couldn't be entirely explained by pandemic adjustments -- was that the acceptance speeches were just about the only thing to watch. Through much of the evening, nearly all of the connective tissue that usually provides diversion and entertainment was stripped out: jokes, sketches, insults, patter, songs, clips montages from the best-picture nominees. (Questlove and Lil Rel Howery's karaoke song-trivia bit was the horrible exception that proved the rule.)  One result seemed to be longer acceptance speeches, with no orchestra to play the winners off, though that might have been a collateral effect of the general flatness.  What really grew, though, was scripted filler -- or, as the producers would have it, storytelling. In many categories the presenters were forced to recite anecdotes about each nominee, generally on the theme of movie love, perhaps a result of the cineaste Soderbergh's influence. These stories about seeing ''Jaws'' or some other classic for the first time were an inconsequential drone that made ''And the Oscar goes to'' feel anticlimactic.  The changes, however necessary, were a reminder of how the rituals of the Oscars, no matter how lame and formulaic, are a crucial part of its appeal -- the mixture of performative glamour with the klutzy, mortifying atmosphere of a high school dance.  The producers appeared to have had one actual idea about how to enliven the show: It opened with a caper-movie-style sequence -- reminiscent of Soderbergh's ''Oceans'' films -- in which a camera tracked Regina King from behind as she walked through the Union Station lobby carrying an Oscar as if it were the Maltese falcon, holding contraband or microfilm.  It was a promising start, and King's immediate invocation of the Derek Chauvin verdict earlier in the week felt right for a ceremony with an unprecedented number of artists of color among its nominees. (Her appearance a few hours later in an Escalade commercial offered a little cognitive dissonance.) But her abbreviated introduction was indicative of the stripped-down, steam-table nature of the show to come.  As the show, despite dropping so much of its usual fiber, dragged on, the treasured ''in memoriam'' montage was hurried onscreen eight minutes before the broadcast's scheduled end, with an introduction that wrapped together pandemic deaths and police killings in a generalized invocation of grief.  Then came the night's one big surprise, the move of the best-picture presentation ahead of best actor and actress. It stole some thunder from the expected victory of ''Nomadland,'' though the film's star, Frances McDormand, tried to make up for it with some impromptu howling.  The winners did their best to give the show some human feeling. Mia Neal, accepting the hair and makeup award for ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' recalled her grandfather's experience of racism in a speech that was a model of force and economy. Thomas Vinterberg, the directing and international-film winner for ''Another Round,'' gave a heartbreaking salute to his daughter, Ida, who was killed in an auto accident during filming. Yuh-Jung Youn, the supporting-actress winner for ''Minari,'' supported her standing as this awards season's leading humorist. Tyler Perry, prepared to accept the humanitarian award, delivered a rousing plug for tolerance.  The victories for ''Ma Rainey'' (which also won costume design), Youn, the short film ''Two Distant Strangers,'' the animated feature ''Soul,'' Daniel Kaluuya as supporting actor in ''Judas and the Black Messiah'' and Chloé Zhao for directing the best-picture winner ''Nomadland'' were among the hopeful signs of the Motion Picture Academy's ability to recognize artists who are not white men and stories that don't center on white men. For many viewers, that was probably reason enough to enjoy the evening.  If you were looking for a real sign of progress, though, it might have been offscreen. Along with the increased presence of women and people of color at Union Station, there was a critical mass this year of (arguably) even better movies by women and people of color that went unrecognized: Channing Godfrey Peoples's ''Miss Juneteenth,'' Gina Prince-Bythewood's ''The Old Guard,'' Roseanne Liang's ''Shadow in the Cloud,'' to mention a few. The more things change, the more they stay the Oscars.  Regina King opened the 93rd Academy Awards with a long stroll through Los Angeles's Union Station. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABC FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0003u "
118		"   LETTER  Babies and Facial Cues  159 words 26 April 2021   20     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  As a retired psychotherapist who has read articles in The Times about returning to normality, I am concerned about the babies and toddlers who have never seen anyone except immediate family members without masks.  To these little ones, masked faces are normal. Once we are able to go maskless, will some of these children grow up more fearful of other people than they otherwise would? Will they be unable to learn to recognize certain facial expressions and react appropriately?  Are there things their families can do now to ameliorate these kinds of effects and ease babies' and small children's transitions to a maskless world in what we hope is the near future?  Jeanne Paul  Ann Arbor, Mich.  No playdates in sight: Alice McGraw at the Mount Olympus monument in San Francisco.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Cayce Clifford for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00035 "
119		"   DEALBOOK NEWSLETTER  How to Design a Hybrid Workplace  1,952 words 26 April 2021   2     Many companies see the appeal of combining office life with work-from-home flexibility. How to strike the right balance can be less clear.  The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in the news. If you don't already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here .  As companies reopen their offices, they are deciding how the virtual work arrangements they've relied on during the pandemic will factor into their long-term plans -- or not.  Google's ''flexible workweek'' calls for employees to spend at least three days a week in the office and the rest at home. Microsoft's ''hybrid workplace'' means most employees can spend up to half their time working remotely. Ford Motor's ''flexible hybrid work model'' leaves it up to workers and their managers to decide how much time they need to spend in the office.  Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase don't have names for their postpandemic policies, because they expect most employees to return to the office for most of the time. Goldman's C.E.O., David Solomon, called working from home an ''aberration,'' and JPMorgan's chief, Jamie Dimon, said it had ''serious weaknesses.''  But many companies have hatched a postpandemic plan in which employees return to the office for some of the time while mixing in more work from home than before. The appeal of this compromise is clear: Employers hope to give employees the flexibility and focus that come from working at home without sacrificing the in-person connections of the office.  How, exactly, to strike this balance can be less obvious.  Should companies require employees to be in the office on certain days? For a set number of days each week? How should those in the office accommodate colleagues working remotely?  To help answer pressing questions like these, DealBook assembled advice from experts about where to start, how to avoid common pitfalls, and the most important things to consider when not everyone is working in the same place.  Where to start  Mr. Pozen, a senior lecturer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management, and Ms. Samuel, a technology researcher, are the authors of ''Remote, Inc.: How to Thrive at Work ... Wherever You Are.''  A review of the research on virtual teams comes up short on universal best practices for designing a hybrid office. But it does suggest certain factors that companies should focus on. We call these five factors FLOCS: function, location, organization, culture and schedule.  What is the function of each team member? A team that spends many hours on brainstorming or collaborative tasks needs more time at the workplace. By contrast, teams that do a lot of deep, focused work benefit from the relative quiet of home.  What is the location of each team member? Hiring in a single metropolitan area means you can join your teammates in a nearby office or meet up easily for one-on-one meetings. Conversely, there's no point in making employees report to the nearest office if everyone they work with is in another city.  What is the structure of the organization? In a comparison of two accounting companies, researchers found that a flatter hierarchy helped facilitate virtual work, because remote workers didn't feel too far from the center of the organization. Our own research also found a strong correlation between employee autonomy and productivity outside the office.  What is the culture of the company? Companies with an individualistic culture seem to make a smoother transition to virtual work; by contrast, companies that stress ''us'' over ''me'' have been slower to adopt online collaboration.  What is each team's schedule? If schedules are similar and work is interdependent, it's good to encourage everyone to work roughly at the same time. If employees live in different time zones, it's better to set a few common windows for real-time communications like videoconferences, and let most other work unfold through email or document sharing.  These factors make it easier for managers to address the most common challenges faced by hybrid teams. Take communication barriers: What if half the team is in the office and the other half is dialing in from home? If their locations are dispersed (so the Zoom callers can't make it into the office) and the organization is flat and decentralized, the company could use a buddy system to make each person in the room responsible for keeping one particular Zoom caller fully in the conversation. If the caller misses something, the in-room buddy can fill in that person via text chat; if the caller is being talked over, the in-room buddy can step in to ensure that the person is heard.  Another common dilemma is deciding exactly who will be in the office on which days. This is further complicated by a significant gap between executive and employee perspectives, with most executives feeling that company culture depends on people spending at least three days a week in the office and most employees saying they want to spend at least three days a week working remotely.  The answer begins with function: Who needs to work closely together to do jobs effectively? These people should spend the most time together. If their locations are close and the team is largely on the same schedule, interdependent team members can go to the office on the same two or three days a week, for the same set of hours. That also opens the door to significant savings on real estate by rotating different teams through the same space.  Similarly, this lens can deal with a typical problem among mostly remote employees: feeling second class, especially if other employees choose to be in the office every day. If employees will rarely be in the office because of location, and an organization is hierarchical in a way that emphasizes climbing the ladder, they may feel left out and worry that they'll miss out on promotions. A team manager can help them by encouraging a schedule that lines up with the rest of the team and addressing cultural biases that exclude particular groups by going directly to remote employees with the latest news and job openings.  There is no single right way to design a hybrid workplace. But asking the right questions can help each team shape what we call the Goldilocks plan -- with not too much or too little remote work.  Choice has a downside  Mr. Bloom is a professor of economics at Stanford University.  In monthly surveys about remote work that my research team has conducted since May, we've found that 30 percent of U.S. employees never want to return to working in the office, while 25 percent never want to spend another day working from home. Given such different views, it seems natural to let the workers choose. One manager told me: ''I treat my team like adults. They get to decide when and where they work as long as they get their jobs done.''  But this approach raises two concerns. One is that it's likely to result in ''mixed mode,'' the widely disliked situation when some people are at home and others are at the office, all appearing in one Zoom box in the conference room.  The second, less obvious concern is the risk to diversity. It turns out that who wants to work from home after the pandemic is not random. In our research we found that among college graduates with young children, women want to work from home full time almost 50 percent more often than men do.  This is problematic given evidence that working from home while your colleagues are in the office can hurt your chance of promotion. In a study I ran in China at a large multinational company, we randomly assigned volunteers to work remotely or remain in the office. Remote employees had a 50 percent lower rate of promotion after 21 months than their colleagues in the office.  Adding this up, you can see how the let-them-choose approach could lead to a diversity crisis: Single young men who generally opt to go into the office five days a week could rocket up the firm while employees with young children, particularly women, prefer to work from home and are held back.  Remote work can be a huge benefit for firms and employees, but should be centrally organized so everyone within the same team is in the office on the same days. This is how working from home will work out.  The elements of teamwork  To better understand how teams can best work together online and in person, the Harvard researchers Ashley Whillans, Leslie Perlow and Aurora Turek interviewed employees at a consulting firm as it adapted to remote work during the pandemic. The researchers used what they learned to define categories of team interactions, which companies can consider when deciding how to structure work -- regardless of where it happens.  Content interactions: communication about tasks, such as sharing feedback while sitting side by side. When work went virtual, more of these interactions took place asynchronously, through digital work tools such as Slack. One manager said communication had improved because individuals had more time to think.  Bounce interactions: new idea generation, as with an impromptu whiteboard brainstorming session. In the virtual version, individuals often generated ideas on their own, and then they and others emailed them back and forth. That made it harder to align with others; some teams adjusted by moving brainstorming sessions to videoconferences.  Process interactions: defining and structuring work, such as check-in meetings. Without an option to drop by a colleague's desk to ask a casual question, teams felt there should be more process conversations, but also that these chats could be exhausting. Some teams moved away from using video meetings to less-demanding communication tools like Slack.  Social interactions: getting to know one another, such as sharing meals when traveling together. Some teams experimented with virtual happy hours or dinners, but not everyone was interested in taking personal time to participate, and many saw these virtual events as less effective than in-person outings.  Huddle interactions: informal exchanges, like those that take place in a hallway between meetings or over coffee. These largely went away in the virtual environment, and managers became the primary conduit of all information. Some teams began scheduling time for informal conversations about work, such as sending a Google invite to debrief after a meeting.  Development interactions: mentorship and development feedback. While weekly meetings continued in the virtual workplace, informal feedback conversations stopped. One person suggested ''sideways'' feedback meetings, where all participants, regardless of position, give feedback to one another.  Ms. Perlow, one of the researchers leading the study, told DealBook that considering these categories while managing partly remote teams can ''shine a light on the different aspects of teamwork that we need to make sure we're solving for.''  ''We used to be co-located, and that was one beast. Now we have 100 percent virtual, and that's one beast. Hybrid is going to be its own beast,'' Ms. Perlow said. ''It's not going to be just a little bit of each. It's going to have its own core issues.''  What do you think? What's the ideal mix between remote and office work? What's lost when people work less in the office? What's gained when they work more from home? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AUDRA MELTON; BEN GARVIN/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00032 "
120		"    Democrats Push a Tax Cut for the Rich  By The Editorial Board  1,035 words 26 April 2021   20     Restoring an unlimited federal tax deduction for state and local tax payments is bad politics and bad policy.  Democrats struck a chord with voters in the 2020 elections by campaigning on the need for the wealthiest Americans to pay higher taxes. Now the party is flirting with a major change in tax policy that would allow the wealthiest Americans to pay lower taxes.  A bloc of House Democrats, mostly from the New York area, are loudly withholding support for a broad package of tax increases to fund President Biden's infrastructure plan unless it also includes a tax cut: an unlimited deduction for state and local tax payments, or SALT.  In the narrowly divided House, it takes only a handful of Democrats to derail the president's agenda by making common cause with do-nothing Republicans. In an open letter last week addressed to the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, 17 of the 19 Democrats who represent New York threatened to do exactly that, writing that they ''reserve the right'' to vote against any tax increase that does not include a ''full repeal'' of the $10,000 limit on the SALT deduction, enacted in 2017.  A number of Democrats from other states, including New Jersey and California, have taken a similar stand. Representative Josh Gottheimer of New Jersey held a news conference last week behind a lectern emblazoned with the logo ''No SALT, no dice.''  Proponents of an unlimited SALT deduction say they are seeking to help middle-class taxpayers. If so, they should go back to the drawing board. The top 20 percent of American households, ranked by income, would receive 96 percent of the benefits of the change, according to a detailed analysis by the widely respected Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center.  The primary beneficiaries would be an even smaller group of the very wealthiest Americans. The 1 percent of households with the highest incomes would receive 54 percent of the benefit, on average paying about $36,000 less per year in federal income taxes.  A tax cut with such a skewed distribution of benefits ought to be unacceptable to any politician genuinely concerned about the rise of economic inequality.  The federal government lets Americans reduce their taxable income either by a standard amount or by the amount spent on such categories as SALT, interest on mortgage loans and charitable contributions. The 2017 law imposed a $10,000 limit on the deductibility of SALT and a separate limit on mortgage interest deductions.  The SALT deduction cap is unfair. The deduction is often described as a federal subsidy for state and local governments because the federal government effectively is paying for a portion of each dollar in state and local taxes. Capping the deduction has the effect of providing a smaller subsidy, per dollar, to jurisdictions that collect more money in taxes.  New Yorkers, who pay higher taxes than most Americans, get more extensive and higher quality public services. Residents of other states choose lower taxes and less government. Federal tax policy should provide consistent support for either choice.  This board historically has opposed the elimination of the federal subsidy. But the rise of economic inequality has increased our focus on the distribution of taxation and led us to a different conclusion: Instead of eliminating the SALT deduction cap, Congress should eliminate the deduction.  The SALT deduction is an inefficient subsidy. The primary beneficiaries are the wealthy people who get a tax break. It would make more sense to collect those dollars from the wealthy and then to provide direct federal financial support to state and local governments.  Proponents of an unlimited SALT deduction have worked hard to portray the cap as a burden on a broad portion of the population. This is wrong in two important respects. First, the existence of the SALT deduction is the primary inequity. It shifts the distribution of taxation off the shoulders of the wealthy and onto the shoulders of the majority who do not make enough money to itemize tax deductions. The bigger the deduction, the greater the inequity.  Second, lifting the cap would primarily benefit the very wealthy. The Tax Policy Center estimates that 16 percent of households making between $100,000 and $200,000 annually would benefit from an unlimited SALT deduction, but that the average benefit would be just $130. Almost everyone making more than a million dollars a year would benefit -- on average by more than $44,000.  The Biden administration has avoided taking a stand on the issue beyond indicating that proponents of a SALT deduction restoration would need to find a way to offset the lost revenue, estimated at almost $90 billion in 2021 alone. But it makes little sense to find another way of raising taxes on the rich so that the money can be returned to the same people.  Mr. Gottheimer, for example, proposed last week that the cost of the SALT plan could be offset by increased Internal Revenue Service enforcement to ''collect what people owe already.'' Is he seriously suggesting that his support for enforcement of the nation's tax laws is contingent on a tax cut? The necessity of stronger tax enforcement is clear, but it ought to be pursued on the merits, and the government surely can find better uses for the money it collects.  Most members of this editorial board are paying more in federal taxes because of the SALT deduction cap. In a narrow financial sense, we would benefit from its repeal. But we believe in the broader benefits of progressive taxation, and in the necessity of concrete steps toward creating a more equal society. Members of Congress who have espoused those principles repeatedly now have an important opportunity to demonstrate their sincerity.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00039 "
121		"    Overlooked No More: Bhanu Athaiya, Who Won India Its First Oscar  By Anita Gates  965 words 26 April 2021   8     Athaiya, a costume designer on more than 100 films, won the award in 1983 for her work on ''Gandhi.''  This article is part of Overlooked, a series of obituaries about remarkable people whose deaths, beginning in 1851, went unreported in The Times.  In 1983, when Bhanu Athaiya won an Oscar for costume design for her work on ''Gandhi,'' not everyone in Hollywood was thrilled.  ''For what? Wrinkled sheets, burlap sacks and loincloths?'' the film critic and author Rex Reed wrote.  Not to mention Army uniforms.  ''Gandhi'' -- a three-hour saga covering more than half a century of politics, protest and purposeful nonviolence in the life of Mahatma Gandhi (Ben Kingsley) -- was anything but a fashion show.  Some Indian moviegoers complained that everyone looked so ordinary, from the actors -- among them John Gielgud, Martin Sheen and the young Candice Bergen (playing the American photographer Margaret Bourke-White) -- to the thousands of extras dressed for crowd scenes.  But Athaiya (pronounced ah-THIGH-yah) knew the value of her work.  ''Richard Attenborough was making a complex film and needed someone who knew India inside out,'' Athaiya told Eastern Eye, a British weekly newspaper, in an interview published last year. ''So much had to be contributed, and I was ready for it.''  ''Gandhi'' won eight Oscars, including best picture, actor and director. And when the costume design award went to Athaiya -- sharing the honor with the British designer John Mollo -- she became the first Oscar winner in history from India.  Bhanumati Annasaheb Rajopadhye was born on April 28, 1929, in Kolhapur, Maharashtra, known as a city of the arts, in British India. She was the third of seven children of Annasaheb Rajopadhye, a painter and photographer from a wealthy family, and Shantabai Rajopadhye. Her father died in 1940.  After completing her formal education at 17, Bhanu moved to Bombay (now Mumbai) and stayed with a woman whose mother happened to work at Eve's Weekly, a popular magazine.  ''They saw my sketches and could tell my hand was good,'' Athaiya told Eastern Eye, adding that she ''had been sketching from a very young age.''  Her work as a magazine illustrator led to a job at a boutique, where she began creating her own designs, although she had never attended fashion school. That brought her to the attention of India's movie industry.  ''Top stars started approaching me on their own and recommending me to filmmakers,'' she told The Indian Express in an interview published last year. In a separate interview, she summed up her career: ''I never had to go knocking on doors.''  She made her film-industry debut in Raj Khosla's ''C.I.D.'' (1956), a black-and-white murder drama (with musical numbers, of course), about halfway through the golden age of Bollywood. She went on to design costumes for more than 100 movies over almost six decades.  They included some of the best of Hindi film, like Guru Dutt's ''Pyaasa'' (1957), about a struggling poet and the prostitute who believes in him; Vijay Anand's ''Guide'' (1965), about an unhappily married woman and a spiritually seeking former tour guide; Ashutosh Gowariker's ''Lagaan: Once Upon a Time in India'' (2001), which combined cricket uniforms, military uniforms and women's fashions of late Victorian England; and the same director's ''Swades'' (2004), about a modern-day scientist returning to his childhood village.  She considered herself a director's designer. She was disdainful of stars who tried to dictate costume decisions and of designers who put their own fame above a film's quality.  Athaiya won particular praise for her designs for the actress Sridevi, angelically dressed in white in Yash Chopra's ''Chandni'' (1989); Zeenat Aman as a physically and psychically scarred wife in ''Satyam Shivam Sundaram'' (1978); Vyjayanthimala in the fantasy ''Amrapali'' (1966); Mumtaz, doing the twist in fancy-party scenes in ''Brahmachari'' (1968); and Waheeda Rehman, one of the designer's favorite actresses, in ''Guide.''  She said she loved her movie career because it allowed her to create designs for both period pictures and contemporary stories.  ''And it has got a timeless life,'' she told Eastern Eye, ''whereas fashion will come and go.''  She married Satyendra Athaiya, a lyricist and poet, in the 1950s. (She changed her billing from Bhanumati to Mrs. Bhanu Athaiya in 1959.) According to The Times of India, he died in 2004.  India can now claim eight Academy Awards, including two for the 2008 film ''Slumdog Millionaire'' (score and sound mixing), an honorary Oscar in 1992 for the director Satyajit Ray and several technical awards.  In 2012, after she learned she had a brain tumor, Athaiya returned her Oscar statuette to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Los Angeles for safekeeping after her death.  She died on Oct. 15, 2020, in Mumbai. She was 91.  Her last film was ''Nagrik'' (2015), a mystery about casually dressed criminals. She was the author of ''The Art of Costume Design'' (2010).  The Oscar was not Athaiya's only major prize. She won India's National Award for Costume Design twice, for ''Lekin...'' (1991) and for ''Lagaan'' a decade later, and the Filmfare Lifetime Achievement Award in 2009.  Working in film, Athaiya said in an interview with The Indian Express, ''became a way to express myself and let my imagination soar.''  ''It was so fulfilling that I did not feel the need to do anything else.''  Bhanu Athaiya, left, with her Oscar statuette. Above, a scene from ''Gandhi.'' Athaiya said that for the three-hour film, ''I had to design costumes spanning 50 years of Gandhi's life in three months.'' The movie won eight Oscars. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BETTMANN, VIA GETTY IMAGES; COLUMBIA PICTURES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002y "
122		"    Helping Those Grieving Covid Deaths  562 words 26 April 2021   20     Readers discuss the loss of loved ones without being able to be at their bedsides and the need for mental health services to help deal with Covid's psychological toll.  To the Editor:  Re ''The Bereavement Crisis Is Coming,'' by Allison Gilbert (Op-Ed, April 13):  Since my mom died from Covid-19 I've struggled with my disembodied grief. As I read Ms. Gilbert's article, it finally struck me that it was as if Mom were kidnapped by Covid.  In her final nine months at a nursing facility in Los Angeles, she was allowed no visitors or interaction with anyone but staff. We tried family Zooms but they were disorienting given her failing eyesight, so we had to rely on the staff members to communicate with her. When Mom tested positive for Covid before Christmas, we essentially lost contact with her.  As she declined, we were told she was being kept ''as comfortable as possible.'' When she died, we were told ''she was not alone.'' We weren't told exactly where her body was for days, and still haven't been able to hold a funeral or find any closure.  Covid didn't leave a ransom note, but it certainly stole my beloved mom.  Rhonda Felicity  Bothell, Wash.  To the Editor:  The crisis of grieving following Covid-19 is very much upon us, appearing in forms less readily recognized. Millions in our country are grieving the loss of loved ones, and millions more are now impaired with the physical or psychological effects, grieving the loss of stable health. We are all grieving the more abstract losses -- loss of familiar routines, of schooling and carefree childhoods, of socialization, of breathing safely in public and of embracing loved ones.  While the end of the pandemic is thankfully in sight, an investment in mental health services -- just as we have done for vaccine development and economic stimulus -- is essential to providing relief for a traumatized nation.  David Fox  Los Angeles  The writer, a doctor and rabbi, is director of crisis intervention, trauma and bereavement support services at Chai Lifeline.  To the Editor:  Therapists, clergy and other helping professions have been busy throughout the year helping families affected by the pandemic. Training for grief work is not new; it is an established field with many capable professionals and hospice-trained bereavement professionals throughout the country.  Establishing yet another federal office, as the Op-Ed suggests, hardly seems to me an efficient way to respond to the losses, which will vary in communities. We know that communities of color have been hard hit. Do we need a federal office to know that we must staff some of our schools with more social workers, counselors and/or teams of trained professionals to run support groups for children and teens?  Governors surely know their states and communities best; while extra resources may be helpful, it is the community that can best identify its needs.  Additionally, not every problem is a crisis. A problem that is not addressed may become a crisis. Let's use our common sense to give states the help they need to increase support to community mental health and schools. A federal office? I think not.  Roxanne Kelber  West Roxbury, Mass.  The writer is a social worker.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Sandra Dionisi FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00036 "
123		"   ASK A SHOWRUNNER  Not Afraid to Take a Big Swing  By Stuart Miller  1,812 words 26 April 2021   5     The first Native American to run a TV comedy talked about creating the new series with Michael Schur and Ed Helms and about her long family history of storytelling.  ''Rutherford Falls,'' the first television comedy with a Native American showrunner, can trace its roots to one of Al Pacino's worst commercial flops and one of the Navajo tribe's largest and most commercially successful tapestries -- although, on a deeper level, its origin story goes back generations.  ''When my family survived the Navajo Long Walk -- the Navajo equivalent of The Trail of Tears -- at Bosque Redondo, the government gave everyone a census number and a name, like a messed up Ellis Island,'' said Sierra Teller Ornelas, who created the show with Michael Schur (''Parks and Recreation,'' ''The Good Place'') and the actor Ed Helms (''The Office'').  ''My great-great-grandfather said, 'I tell the stories of my people, I'm a storyteller,''' she continued. ''So they named him Teller. Working in television is just the continuation of his art form.''  Debuting Thursday on Peacock, ''Rutherford Falls'' will in some ways feel familiar to fans of its creators' past work -- a single-camera sitcom with a warmhearted style and a charismatic ensemble. (Teller Ornelas was a producer on ''Brooklyn Nine-Nine'' and a writer and co-executive producer on ''Superstore.'') The series centers on the best friends Nathan Rutherford (Helms) and Reagan Wells (Jana Schmieding), both of whom are Leslie Knope-like in their total dedication to their shared career passion, which is historical preservation.  But for all the camaraderie and wit, ''Parks and Rec'' it isn't -- in ''Rutherford Falls,'' both the show and the fictional northeastern town for which it is named, the stakes are more overtly political. Nathan is obsessively devoted to his local museum and to preserving the history of the town named for his family, although this can make him self-righteous or oblivious. Reagan is struggling to create a cultural center inside a casino to similarly preserve the history of her fictional Minishonka tribe, whose territory abuts Rutherford Falls.  A local dispute develops involving Nathan and the casino's ambitious frontman, Terry Thomas (Michael Greyeyes), one of multiple other Indigenous characters in the main cast. When the dispute attracts national media attention in the form of an NPR reporter (Dustin Milligan), a season's worth of plot is set in motion. It required a bit of a balancing act with regard to stakes and the characters' motives.  ''People like clean narratives with good guys and bad guys but when you do that you erase whole histories,'' Teller Ornelas said. ''With Nathan it's about holding two ideas in hand at same time -- how is he able to be so blind to these huge discrepancies but also so good to Reagan?''  The differences are significant behind the camera, too, including a writers' room half staffed with Indigenous writers. Among them is Teller Ornelas, who is also the series's showrunner. Speaking from her home in Los Angeles last week, Teller Ornelas, who is also Mexican-American, said she had known she wanted to be a TV writer by the second grade.  ''I watched a lot of television and I lived in a house where comedy was really rewarded -- if you were funny you could get out of trouble,'' she said. ''And I used to watch 'The Dick Van Dyke Show,' and at seven years old I felt like I had a Rose Marie vibe.''  Yet after writing sketch comedy at the University of Arizona, she spent five years working at the National Museum of the American Indian, part of the Smithsonian Institution, where she programmed and wrote about films. It wasn't until 2009 that she ditched her job (and her boyfriend), applying for back-to-back diversity writing programs that ultimately landed her a staff job on the sitcom ''Happy Endings.''  In a video interview, Teller Ornelas explained how her parents' choices inspired her to pursue her dreams and why it's important to have more than one Native writer and Native actor on her show. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.  What made you take that plunge and restart your life?  In the 1980s, we were living on a reservation, but my mom and aunt were well-known Navajo tapestry weavers. We went to England for a residency there for a few months. [Teller Ornelas is also an accomplished weaver.] Someone saw us on a kids' show promoting the festival we were part of and called saying they needed Native extras for a movie. It was ''Revolution.'' So we stayed in England longer and got to meet Al Pacino, which was really cool. My brother is named Michael after Michael Corleone -- we are big pop culture people.  After that experience, my dad, who was a bus driver and substitute teacher, said we have to make a change. My grandmother pitched the idea of weaving this giant rug and my mom and aunt spent four years on it -- two years weaving and two years where they got into a big fight and didn't talk. It sold for $60,000 -- one of those big-swing moments that changed our lives. It allowed my parents to pull themselves out of their socioeconomic situations; my mom put my dad through pharmacy school. So in 2009, I thought I should just try and become a TV writer -- I should take a big swing, too.  Was there a moment when you knew you had what it took to make it?  The ''Happy Endings'' writers room had 20 writers, and everyone was always talking. I was very scared initially. Every day the writers' assistant types everything that's been said, and I would go home and read the notes to see if they'd recorded anything that I said. One day, I solved a problem for a scene and it was in the notes and I said, ''I got it, I can do this.''  You built an extensive résumé as a writer and producer, but were you always aiming for showrunner?  I don't think I ever admitted to myself that I wanted to be a showrunner, but I was definitely always training -- I loved learning from other writers, and I was writing notes about the advice they gave.  When I was a kid and we played house, I'd say, ''I'll be the baby,'' and everyone would say, ''You're the mom.'' I never shied away from being a boss. The Navajo are a matrilineal tribe, so it's not weird for women to be in charge. And I had great templates.  Ed Helms and Michael Schur concocted the initial idea. How developed was it when you joined in?  They had a half-formed idea. They'd developed the character of Nathan Rutherford based on the ''backfire effect,'' that weird hiccup in human psychology where if you are given information that goes against a core belief of yours, even if it's irrefutable, people will mostly not accept it -- they will actually double down on their previous belief. It's why we have anti-vaxxers, why people can't let go of certain politicians.  They wanted someone nonwhite to collaborate with them and pitched me what they had. They had one or two Native characters, and I said, ''What if there were 10?'' I took my museum background and then pitched a bunch of different characters, and we were off to the races.  I also wanted to have as many Native writers as we could get. When Mike asked how big the writing team should be, I said 10. He said five should be Native. That was great. When I first got into the business, my [writing sample] was a Native sitcom, and people said, ''This is great but it will never get made.'' We were always being told there's not enough talent or writers. It's not true. We found more Native writers than we could staff and multiple actors for each role. It was an embarrassment of riches.  Is it freeing to have enough Native characters that some can be mean to each other or occasionally be a jerk or a fool?  The course corrections to old stereotypes have often become such a positive stereotype of Natives that they don't seem human. If you don't have just one person to bear the brunt of representation, you can have complex, layered people. I wanted to tell a story where you could have three Native people having a regular conversation, maybe talking about movies. That's what's revolutionary, is us just getting to be funny and smart and interesting. Those are the Native people I know. But we're not perfect.  Did you strive to fill other off-camera roles with Natives too?  Absolutely. Sydney Freeland [a Navajo woman] directed four episodes. The Halluci Nation [formerly A Tribe Called Red] are our co-composers. We showcase fashion and art from people like Bethany Yellowtail and Jamie Okuma.  This summer, FX will debut ''Reservation Dogs,'' another Native-focused show with another Native showrunner. Do you think this is a sign of change in America or just an oddity of timing?  There is a cultural shift. It's a long time coming. Standing Rock was a watershed moment for Native visibility, where a lot of people became more aware of the issues we were experiencing. That ripples out in so many ways, like in Native fashion, where it moved to not just buying Native-inspired fashion but people buying from us.  The TV landscape has really changed. I remember watching ''Transparent'' and ''Pose'' and being blown away by the storytelling, but I also looked up the percentage of trans people and of Native people and saying ''we're close.'' Marginalized groups are finally getting to make their own stuff. We're allowing different types of stories to be told. We should have been doing this a long time ago.  Were you wary of mixing serious issues and moments in with the laughs?  We never wanted it to be homework. But some of the best comedies have had long monologues that educated people. I never thought I would get to do this, so once we were in the writers' room with snacks and a whiteboard, I felt: ''We're putting everything we've got in this season. We are not going to shy away from anything.''  Above, Sierra Teller Ornelas, the showrunner for ''Rutherford Falls.'' She is the first Native American to hold that position. In the Peacock sitcom, Michael Greyeyes, below left, plays a Native casino owner who comes into conflict with a local historian, portrayed by Ed Helms, below. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NIA MACKNIGHT FOR THE new_york_times; COLLEEN HAYES/PEACOCK)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002w "
124		"   THE PLAYLIST  A Rock 'n' Roll Nostalgia Trip and 10 More Worthy Tunes  By Jon Pareles, Jon Caramanica and Giovanni Russonello  1,129 words 26 April 2021   6     Hear tracks by YoungBoy Never Broke Again, Yola, Alfa Mist and others.  Every Friday, pop critics for The new_york_times weigh in on the week's most notable new songs and videos. Just want the music? Listen to the Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com and sign up for our Louder newsletter , a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage.  Weezer, 'I Need Some of That'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Unheroic 1970s and 1980s nostalgia fills ''I Need Some of That,'' Weezer's remembrance of growing up suburban and finding music as rebellion: ''I was in my hatchback ragin','' Rivers Cuomo sings. It's part of the band's pointedly titled pop-metal album, ''Van Weezer.'' The proudly multilayered guitars and vocals invoke Boston and the Cars as well as the band the song mentions, Aerosmith. ''Even when we blow up, we're never gonna grow up,'' the song insists. But the track's last spoken-word postscripts are grown-up and businesslike; they involve copyrights. JON PARELES  Jupiter & Okwess featuring Marcelo D2, 'Telejayi'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''Na Kazonga,'' the new album by the Congolese band Jupiter & Okwess, opens with a blast of international funk: ''Telejayi,'' a mesh of rich Congolese vocal harmonies, Fela-style Nigerian Afrobeat and vehement guest verses from -- why not? -- a Brazilian rapper, Marcelo D2. The lyrics are somber, mourning death and reflecting, ''We are only visitors on this Earth''; the music is alive in the here and now. PARELES  Yola, 'Diamond Studded Shoes'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  The music in ''Diamond Studded Shoes'' radiates optimism. It's an upbeat soul-gospel shuffle, filled with little flashes of exuberance from a frisky studio band: a quick bass run, an organ burble, a slide-guitar swoop, a ripple of honky-tonk piano. But Yola's lyrics are far more skeptical; she's warning that the rich and privileged still have everything rigged in their favor. ''Don't you tell me it'll be all right/When we know it isn't,'' she insists. ''And that's why we gots to fight.'' PARELES  Cordae featuring Q-Tip, 'More Life'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Cordae is a dexterous and thoughtful rapper, but at times in the past he's sounded constrained by his own perfectionism. On the earnest, calm ''More Life'' -- from a between-albums place-holder EP, ''Just Until....'' -- he sounds relaxed and assured, with slow-trot wisdom (''Laid my life over these lucrative scores/Document struggles that we choose to endure'') over a bright beat with a bit of citrusy tang. At the hook, Q-Tip plays the beneficent elder, offering guru-like wisdom to a rapper who's a clear inheritor of his. CARAMANICA  Morray, 'Trenches'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''I got love for the ghetto, love for the hood/Love for the people that turn the bad into good,'' Morray insists in ''Trenches.'' Morray, a songwriter from Fayetteville, N.C., sings and raps with a fervent, church-rooted voice. ''Trenches,'' from an album due next week titled ''Street Sermons,'' rides the minor chords and trap beats that often accompany antisocial boasts. But while ''Trenches'' doesn't ignore gangs, drugs or poverty, Morray also recognizes a community that holds families, neighbors and friends: ''They don't see the good times that outweigh the bad days/In the hood we still smile to lighten up them dark caves.'' PARELES  YoungBoy Never Broke Again, 'Territorial'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Just another starkly beautiful, emotionally scarred, cathartic purge from the most quietly influential rapper of the last few years. CARAMANICA  Jorja Smith, 'Gone'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  The production is basic: a programmed beat, a cycle of electric-keyboard chords, increments of bass and backup voices. But Jorja Smith's words and voice sketch a world of loss: ''Tell me what to do when the ones you loved have gone missing.'' PARELES  Sasha Sloan featuring Sam Hunt, 'When Was It Over?'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Sasha Sloan begins this song detailing a laundry list of misbehaviors and irritations, a knowing confession of failure to rise to the responsibilities of a relationship. It's an icy start to a moody country-pop duet. When Sam Hunt arrives, he sounds wet with anguish -- his misdeeds are giving him agita. By the end of the song, they're groaning in harmony, the only thing left they have in common. CARAMANICA  John Grant, 'Rhetorical Figure'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Writers, this one's for us. Open a dictionary for the obscure but clearly defined literary devices that John Grant riffles through in ''Rhetorical Figure'' -- yes, ''epizeuxis'' and ''paraprosodokians'' mean something. And stick around for the pumping electronics that merge prog-rock and post-punk. PARELES  Alfa Mist, 'Last Card (Bumper Cars)'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Alfa Mist is a London-based producer, multi-instrumentalist and M.C. with an ever-deepening -- and increasingly rewarding -- engagement with jazz. He composed and arranged all the tracks on ''Bring Backs''; to make them come alive he assembled a chamber ensemble of brass, woodwinds, strings and rhythm section. ''Last Card (Bumper Cars)'' opens with the poet Hilary Thomas calling up wispy memories of a distant past ''back home,'' over Alfa Mist's lightly tolling Rhodes and rustling atmospheric percussion. Later on, a verse from Thomas marks a transition (''Friday was payday, and glory comes Sunday,'' she says); the band kicks into a coda of proud horn declarations, over strutting rhythms that toggle abruptly. Then Alfa Mist cuts it off, as if ripping a needle off a record. GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO  Arooj Aftab, 'Mohabbat'  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Arooj Aftab, who was born in Pakistan and now lives in Brooklyn, carries an ancient verse form, the ghazal, toward the West on her serenely innovative album released on Friday, ''Vulture Prince.'' Written by the Indian poet Hafeez Hoshiarpuri, ''Mohabbat'' declares, ambiguously, that ''the number of people who love will never decrease,'' and it has been recorded many times in traditional South Asian styles. Aftab, who attended the Berklee College of Music, transforms it. Her voice is contemplative, breathy and relaxed, with the intimacy of indie-pop and jazz though she occasionally uses the microtonal embellishments of classical South Asian singing. She's accompanied by intricate plucked patterns on harp, guitar and bass fiddle, sustained tones from brass and electronics and quiet metallic percussion. The song doesn't bridge two worlds; it creates its own. PARELES  Rivers Cuomo and his Weezer bandmates recall growing up in the suburbs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAURO PIMENTEL/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00031 "
125		"   ASK WELL  The 'Two-Out-of-Three-Rule' for Masking Up  By Tara Parker-Pope  1,732 words 26 April 2021   4     Science shows that the risk of viral transmission outside is very low. The ''two-out-of-three rule'' can help you decide whether to mask up.  As more people get vaccinated and spring weather and sunshine beckon us outdoors, one question may be nagging at you: Do we still need to wear masks outside?  More than a year into pandemic life, many people remain confused about the risk of spending time outdoors around other people. A growing body of research shows that transmission of Covid-19 is far less likely outdoors than inside, and the risk will get even lower as more people get vaccinated and cases continue to decline. But many states have yet to lift strict outdoor mask mandates. In Massachusetts, for instance, outdoor masking is required at all times, even when nobody else is around.  Recently the online magazine Slate stirred controversy when it suggested an end to outdoor mask rules. The article won support from top public health experts and even The New England Journal of Medicine blog but prompted a fierce backlash from readers, who noted that while the risk of outdoor transmission may be low, it's not zero.  ''Shallow and selfish take,'' wrote one reader on Twitter. ''You have blood on your hands. You should feel ashamed,'' posted another.  After a year in which many of us have learned to dutifully wear masks and look askance at anyone who does not, it's understandable that people remain fearful when they cross paths with the unmasked. So how do you make the right decision about when to wear a mask outside?  Many virus and public health experts say the guidance hasn't changed -- spending time with others outside during the pandemic has always been safer than indoors. But whether a mask is needed outdoors depends on the circumstances, including local public health rules and whether you and the people you're with are vaccinated. Brief encounters with an unmasked person passing you on the sidewalk or a hiking trail are very low risk, said Linsey Marr, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Virginia Tech and one of the world's leading experts on viral transmission. Viral particles quickly disperse in outdoor air, and the risk of inhaling aerosolized virus from a jogger or passers-by is negligible, she said. Even if a person coughs or sneezes outside as you walk by, the odds of you getting a large enough dose of virus to become infected remain low, she said.  ''I think the guidelines should be based on science and practicality,'' said Dr. Marr. ''People only have so much bandwidth to think about precautions. I think we should focus on the areas that have highest risk of transmission, and give people a break when the risk is extremely low.''  Dr. Marr uses a simple two-out-of-three rule for deciding when to wear a mask in public spaces or when she doesn't know everyone's vaccination status. In these situations, she makes sure she's meeting two out of three conditions: outdoors, distanced and masked. ''If you're outdoors, you either need to be distanced or masked,'' she said. ''If you're not outdoors, you need to be distanced and masked. This is how I've been living for the past year. It all comes down to my two-out-of-three rule.''  Use the 2-out-of-3 Rule  To lower risk for Covid-19, make sure your activity meets two out of the following three conditions: outdoors, distanced and masked.  Outdoors + Distanced = No Mask Needed  Outdoors + No Distance = Mask Needed  Not Outdoors + Distanced = Mask Needed  When masks are needed outdoors  If you stop to have an extended conversation with someone who isn't vaccinated, masks are recommended. Even outdoors, your risk of breathing someone else's air increases the longer and closer you stand to them. One of the few documented cases of outdoor transmission happened in China early in the pandemic, when a 27-year-old man stopped to chat outside with a friend who had just returned from Wuhan, where the virus originated. Seven days later, he had his first symptoms of Covid-19.  And masks are still advised if you find yourself in an outdoor crowd. Standing shoulder to shoulder with strangers during an outdoor concert or a protest could increase risk, particularly for the unvaccinated.  Recently while hiking without a mask, Dr. Marr said she still made an effort to keep her distance from large groups when the trail got crowded.  ''If I was passing by a solo hiker it didn't concern me,'' said Dr. Marr. ''But if I passed by a group of 10 hikers in a row, I stepped further off the path. The risk is still low, but at some point there could be a large enough pack of people that the risk could become appreciable.''  When outdoor risk is lowest  Walking your dog, riding a bike, hiking on a trail or picnicking with members of your household or vaccinated friends are all activities where the risk for virus exposure is negligible. In these kinds of situations, you can keep a mask on hand in your pocket, in case you find yourself in a crowd or need to go indoors.  ''I think it's a bit too much to ask people to put the mask on when they go out for a walk or jogging or cycling,'' said Dr. Muge Cevik, a clinical lecturer of infectious disease and medical virology at the University of St. Andrews School of Medicine in Scotland, where outdoor masking has never been required. ''We're in a different stage of the pandemic. I think outdoor masks should not have been mandated at all. It's not where the infection and transmission occurs.''  ''Let me go for my run, maskless. Mask in pocket,'' tweeted Dr. Nahid Bhadelia, an infectious diseases physician and the medical director of the special pathogens unit at Boston Medical Center. ''Given how conservative I have been on my opinions all year, this should tell you how low risk is, in general, for outdoors transmission for contact over short periods -- and lower still after vaccination. Keep the masks on you for when you are stationary in a crowd and headed indoors.''  To understand just how low the risk of outdoor transmission is, researchers in Italy used mathematical models to calculate the amount of time it would take for a person to become infected outdoors in Milan. They imagined a grim scenario in which 10 percent of the population was infected with the coronavirus. Their calculations showed that if a person avoided crowds, it would take, on average, 31.5 days of continuous outdoor exposure to inhale a dose of virus sufficient to transmit infection.  ''The results are that this risk is negligible in outdoor air if crowds and direct contact among people are avoided,'' said Daniele Contini, senior author of the study and an aerosol scientist at the Institute of Atmospheric Sciences and Climate in Lecce, Italy.  Even as more-infectious virus variants circulate, the physics of viral transmission outdoors haven't changed, and the risk of getting infected outdoors is still low, say virus experts. Pay attention to the rates of infection in your community. If case counts are surging, your risk of encountering an infected person goes up.  When outdoor fun moves indoors  Dr. Cevik notes that debates about outdoor masking and articles showing photos of crowded beaches during the pandemic have left people with the wrong impression that parks and beaches are unsafe, and distracted from the much higher risks of indoor transmission. Often it's the indoor activities associated with outdoor fun -- like traveling unmasked in a subway or car to go hiking, or dropping into a pub after spending time at the beach -- that pose the highest risk. ''People hold barbecues outdoors, but then they spend time indoors chatting in the kitchen,'' said Dr. Cevik.  As more people get vaccinated, decisions about going maskless outdoors will get easier. While no vaccine offers 100 percent protection, the rate of breakthrough infections so far has been exceedingly low. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently reported just 5,800 cases of breakthrough infections among 75 million vaccinated people. And the C.D.C. has said vaccinated friends and family members can safely spend time together, without masks.  But it's OK to keep wearing your mask outdoors if you prefer it. After a year of taking pandemic precautions, it may be hard for people to adjust to less restrictive behaviors. Sarit A. Golub, a psychology professor at Hunter College of the City University of New York, said it's important for both the media and public health officials to communicate the reasons people can modify some behaviors, like outdoor masking.  ''In the coming months, 'normal life' will begin to become safer, but I worry that some people won't be willing or able to relax pandemic restrictions in ways that makes sense,'' Dr. Golub said. ''I worry that folks have internalized the fear messaging without understanding the reasons behind specific behavioral recommendations, and therefore, the reasons that they can be modified as circumstances change.''  Gregg Gonsalves, assistant professor of epidemiology at the Yale School of Public Health, said he recently was with a group of parents, including many vaccinated physicians, who met in a New Haven park to celebrate a child's first birthday. ''We're all just standing around, everybody was masked, and then we started asking, 'When's the time we can be outside and take off our masks?''' Dr. Gonsalves said. ''If people are vaccinated and you're outdoors, masks are probably superfluous at this point.''  But Dr. Gonsalves said he understands why some people may be reluctant to give up their masks outdoors. ''Some of this is Covid hangover,'' he said. ''We've been so traumatized by all of this. I think we need to have a little bit of compassion for the people having trouble letting go.''  Illustrations by Eden Weingart  A growing body of research shows that transmission of Covid-19 is far less likely outdoors than inside, and the risk will decrease as vaccinations rise. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JESSICA PONS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002x "
126		"   ON TECH  Why Is Big Tech Under Assault? Power.  By Shira Ovide  968 words 26 April 2021   5     Tech executives wanted to change the world, and they did. Of course we're now questioning them.  This article is part of the On Tech newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it weekdays.  Big technology companies are still misdiagnosing why they have so many enemies.  Mark Zuckerberg this week told interviewers that people and institutions who are losing control in the world blame Facebook for the changes they're seeing. Jeff Bezos last week countered critics of Amazon by doing back-of-the-envelope math to calculate his company's value to shoppers, employees and businesses.  The sentiment behind these executives' messages was, basically: If people don't appreciate our companies' contributions to the world, they're wrong.  Zuckerberg and Bezos were sort of right, but they also missed the point. They failed to acknowledge the root cause of government investigations into tech companies and criticisms from some competitors and business partners: Where there is power, there is suspicion. And technology companies are among the most powerful forces in the world.  It's been more than a decade since the technology industry emerged from the financial crisis as a dominant influence on economies and on how we live and perceive the world. And I'm surprised that tech bosses can still appear clueless about the reasons behind the questioning of their industry. Repeat after me: It's about their power.  The suspicion may not always be fair or productive. But executives like Bezos and Zuckerberg have big megaphones, and it matters when they misunderstand (or deliberately misconstrue) why some people in the world, including customers like us, can get anxious about their power.  To give some examples: Facebook, Twitter and YouTube froze out former President Donald J. Trump after he repeatedly posted messages that falsely claimed election fraud and incited a crowd that stormed the U.S. Capitol. Soon, a quasi-judicial body created by Facebook is going to decide whether Trump should have his account back.  Apple is about to reprogram iPhone software in ways that could significantly limit the amount of data that all companies collect about us.  These companies can single-handedly decide whether world leaders have a big platform to talk directly to citizens, and upend America's data-tracking surveillance industries. Putting aside the companies' decisions here, it's unsettling that a handful of unelected tech executives have this much power.  The boss of a company that sells backyard fire pits asked The Wall Street Journal: ''Why is Apple now the decider?'' That's exactly the right question, and not just about Apple. One of the big questions for our time is: What, if anything, should be done about a few tech companies that have so much power?  Are Amazon and gig economy companies remaking the nature of work and the U.S. economy? And is that right? Is it fair that Google, Facebook and Twitter are de facto State Departments, with the authority to decide whether to follow repressive speech laws or fight them?  When a few giant tech companies have power on par with governments, that deserves attention and probing. Sometimes I think technology executives get this. Bezos regularly says that large and important institutions including Amazon deserve scrutiny. (Who knows if he means it.)  Tech companies are right that there is often misplaced anger at them for broader social dislocations including polarization and income inequality. They're right that when some government officials go after them, it's often out of self-interest.  But tech companies wanted to be in a position where they have so much influence. They wanted to change the world -- and they did. They cannot and should not be surprised that now lots of people and authorities are questioning why these companies have so much power and whether they're using it wisely.  What is the role of technology in combating climate change and improving public health? On Thursday, The new_york_times is hosting conversations with experts on that question and more. Click this link to sign up for the virtual event.  Before we go ...  Her online video challenged the official narrative: A key piece of evidence in Tuesday's murder conviction of Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer who killed George Floyd last year, was a video recorded by a teenager and posted to Facebook. My colleagues Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and Marie Fazio wrote about the teenager, Darnella Frazier, and the power of bearing witness through screens.  India's information gap is filled by citizens: As coronavirus cases surge in India, volunteer-run online spreadsheets, apps and Twitter threads have become essential help lines that try to compensate for failures of government action, Rest of World writes. One app, Covid Resources, organizes a tangle of information on those who can provide antiviral drugs, oxygen and food and have available hospital beds.  What's new from Apple: The company is starting a subscription option for podcasts, and unveiled an updated lineup of iPads and Macs plus new gadgets to track misplaced items like keys. My colleague Jack Nicas explained why Apple is increasingly clashing with smaller companies, including over fees it charges and the privacy changes it is imposing on apps.  Hugs to this  Please wish a happy birthday to Filbert, a beaver at the Oregon Zoo. The zoo called him ''branch manager of the year.'' Get it? GET IT?  We want to hear from you. Tell us what you think of this newsletter and what else you'd like us to explore. You can reach us at ontech@nytimes.com.  If you don't already get this newsletter in your inbox, please sign up here .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY James Kerr / Scorpion Dagger FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002v "
127		"    Writing in Italian, and Finding a New Voice  By Joumana Khatib  1,497 words 26 April 2021   1     In an unusual literary and linguistic feat, the Pulitzer-winning author of ''Interpreter of Maladies'' and ''The Namesake'' wrote her latest novel, ''Whereabouts,'' in Italian and translated it to English.  Literary translators have come up with plenty of analogies for their trade. Some compare it to acting, others to performing in a chamber ensemble.  Jhumpa Lahiri opted for a more visceral description in ''In Other Words,'' the first book she wrote in Italian. English was ''a hairy, smelly teenager'' menacing her nascent Italian, she wrote, which she cradled ''like a newborn.''  That book traces her self-imposed linguistic exile: In 2012, she and her family moved to Rome so she could pursue a decades-long interest in the language. She gave up English for years, reading and writing almost exclusively in Italian. Before the book's 2016 release in English, Lahiri passed the translation to Ann Goldstein, who handled the English editions of Elena Ferrante's Neapolitan quartet, fearful that translating her own work would contaminate her Italian.  Five years later and living back in the United States, Lahiri has resolved those doubts. Knopf next week will release her new novel, ''Whereabouts,'' which Lahiri published in Italian in 2018 as ''Dove Mi Trovo'' and translated herself.  It is the first book Knopf will publish that was translated by its own author. But that step wasn't a given.  ''I was just convinced that the book couldn't be in English, because I didn't know where in me it had come from,'' Lahiri said over video from Princeton, N.J., where she is the director of the university's creative writing program. Presenting a book in Italy, ''there's a more formal engagement with the text,'' she said. ''In a sense, your book is exposed to more rigorous public reading.''  The thought initially terrified her, but at the same time, ''it was one of the things that inspired me to learn Italian, because I wanted to be able to speak about my work in Italian. I wanted to have these conversations in Italian,'' Lahiri, 53, said. ''That was like the final challenge.''  That critical reception, and leaving plenty of time after the book's initial publication, was essential before starting the English version. She had approached a translator, Frederika Randall, about the project, thinking they would collaborate in its final stages. But once Lahiri reviewed Randall's early drafts, and saw that ''the book could be in English,'' she decided, ''Maybe I can do this.''  Fans of the intimacy and detail of Lahiri's earlier work, such as ''The Namesake'' and ''The Lowland,'' may be surprised by ''Whereabouts.'' Lahiri was born in London to Bengali parents, moved to the United States at a young age and grew up in South Kingstown, R.I. Many of her stories draw on her heritage and the persistent feelings of being an outsider or between identities. The former Times critic Michiko Kakutani, reviewing Lahiri's Pulitzer Prize-winning debut, ''Interpreter of Maladies,'' called the characters' experiences an ''index of a more existential sense of dislocation.''  ''Whereabouts,'' in contrast, is an austere, virtually plotless book. Its unnamed narrator is a solitary Roman woman -- though Rome is never mentioned -- who recounts her few excursions in brief chapters. Lahiri offers readers glimpses of the woman at the pool (''In that container of clear water lacking life or current I see the same people with whom, for whatever reason, I feel a connection''), herded unexpectedly into a guided tour (''I'm caught in the charade, I play a part in it, albeit as an extra''), eating a sandwich in a playground (''As I eat it, my body bakes in the sun that pours down on my neighborhood, each bite, feeling sacred, reminds me that I'm not forsaken'').  Other characters appear -- her therapist, her mother, a friend -- yet the interactions reinforce the narrator's isolation. ''Solitude: It's become my trade,'' she tells herself.  Alessandro Giammei, an assistant professor of Italian at Bryn Mawr and a former colleague of Lahiri's, was an early reader of both the Italian and English versions. In ''Dove Mi Trovo,'' he was struck by the elegance of the language and the precision of Lahiri's word choices. ''You cannot read this book without moving your mouth in Italian,'' he said.  ''The incredible detail of her observational writing that is classic Jhumpa Lahiri is not in 'Whereabouts,''' Giammei said. If, in English, Lahiri is an eye, he added, ''in Italian, she's an ear.''  Lahiri began drafting ''Whereabouts'' in 2015, after the Italian version of ''In Other Words'' had been released. It began as a series of sketches, scenes she'd jot down in a notebook. By the time she could see them coming together in a book, she had moved to the United States for the job at Princeton, but she returned frequently to Rome, writing more sequences with each visit.  ''The Italian was like a faucet back then,'' she said. ''It would only work when I was there.''  Apart from her own writing -- ''Whereabouts'' is the third book she composed in Italian, following ''In Other Words'' and ''The Clothing of Books,'' published in 2016 -- Lahiri kept busy with other translations and editing projects. She has translated two novels by an acclaimed contemporary writer, Domenico Starnone, one of which was a finalist for a National Book Award, and has a third set for release in the fall. Dismayed by the lack of quality translations of some of her favorite Italian writers, she edited and contributed translations to a volume of collected short stories. Several of those selections, including stories by Elsa Morante and Fabrizia Ramondino, had never before appeared in English.  ''Translation, to me, is metamorphosis,'' Lahiri said. ''It is a kind of radical re-creation of the work, because you are recreating the language to allow that work to be reborn.''  She, too, is changing, and readers can feel a shift in her work. Sara Antonelli, a professor of American literature at Università Roma Tre and a friend of Lahiri's, had read her books in English. But reading her in Italian, ''I had the impression that I was reading another author,'' she said. ''It seemed that the imagination was different, the shape of the sentences, too.''  Lahiri is not the first American writer to live and write in Rome: Henry James, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Ralph Ellison and Margaret Fuller were all expatriates there for a time. But aside from Lahiri, Antonelli wrote in an email, ''not one of them found a home, a new home, in the Italian language.''  Readers in Italy appreciate Lahiri's devotion to the language and have become protective of her as one of their own. At her book events, ''nobody ever asks Jhumpa, 'Why Italian?,''' Giammei said, and some readers have even worried over her return to America and English-language writing.  ''Translation, paradoxically, is making it definitive,'' he added, as if Lahiri is declaring, ''Now that I put myself in the position of translating my own stuff, I really am an Italian writer.''  The past year has been a generative time for Lahiri, who has four books in various stages of completion. One is a poetry collection that she wrote in Italian -- a first for her. ''I never wrote poems before, I've never written poems in English,'' she said. ''It's like I went to sleep and came back to the laboratory, and all of this stuff was pouring out of the beakers.''  She will likely continue to be asked what she gets out of writing in Italian, and whether she will ever return to English. (Some critics, reviewing ''In Other Words,'' expressed their hope that she would.) ''People try to look for reasons, which is normal, to try to understand or determine some kind of plan or design. But I didn't have one. I never thought I would do any of this,'' Lahiri said. With Italian, it's as if ''I've been handed this huge ring of new keys somehow.''  Antonelli, as a literary critic and scholar, still has questions she's never broached with her friend. ''What was missing or absent in the English language that compelled her to make this transition? And what did a Bengali-American find so liberating, so regenerating, in Rome and the Italian language?''  When the questions are relayed to Lahiri, her reply is simple.  ''Joy,'' she said.  Follow new_york_times Books on Facebook , Twitter and Instagram , sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar . And listen to us on the Book Review podcast .  Jhumpa Lahiri at Princeton. Her novel ''Whereabouts'' is coming out this week. (C1); Jhumpa Lahiri says translation ''is a kind of radical re-creation of the work, because you are recreating the language to allow that work to be reborn.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CELESTE SLOMAN FOR THE new_york_times) (C6)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002u "
128		"    Felix Silla, 84, Cousin Itt On 'The Addams Family'  By The Associated Press  489 words 26 April 2021   7     He made a strong impression in his best-known role, even though his face wasn't seen and his voice wasn't heard.  Felix Silla, the actor best known for playing the hairy Cousin Itt on the sitcom ''The Addams Family,'' died on April 16. He was 84.  The cause was cancer, Mr. Silla's representative, Bonnie Vent, said in a statement. She did not say where he died.  Mr. Silla, who stood less than four feet tall, appeared as Cousin Itt in 17 episodes of ''The Addams Family,'' although his face was not seen and his voice was not heard. Sporting a floor-length hairpiece, sunglasses and a bowler hat, Cousin Itt spoke in a high-pitched mumble (his voice was provided by someone else in postproduction), which was understood only by the other members of the family.  ''The Addams Family,'' seen on ABC from 1964 to 1966, was based on Charles Addams's New Yorker cartoons about a family that was (in the words of its theme song) ''mysterious and spooky.'' Cousin Itt, who became a fan favorite, was created specifically for the show.  Mr. Silla's face also went unseen in other roles, including the robot Twiki on the 1979-81 NBC science fiction series ''Buck Rogers in the 25th Century.'' He was unheard there as well; Twiki's voice was provided for most of the show's run by Mel Blanc.  He played an Ewok who rode a hang glider in the ''Star Wars'' film ''Return of the Jedi'' (1983). Four years later he was in Mel Brooks's ''Star Wars'' parody, ''Spaceballs.''  ''Felix knew a lot about making characters come to life with no dialogue,'' Ms. Vent said.  Viewers had a chance to see Mr. Silla's face in the 1975 film ''The Black Bird,'' a comedic sequel to ''The Maltese Falcon,'' in which he played a villain named Litvak who menaces Sam Spade Jr. (George Segal).  Mr. Silla did stunt work in ''E.T.'' ''Poltergeist,'' ''The Golden Child'' and other films. His many TV appearances, in addition to ''The Addams Family'' and ''Buck Rogers,'' included roles on ''Bewitched,'' ''Bonanza'' and ''H.R. Pufnstuf.''  His final big-screen role was in ''Characterz,'' a 2016 film about costumed mascots.  Felix Silla was born on Jan. 11, 1937, in Abruzzo, Italy, and came to the United States in 1955. He toured with the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus as a bareback rider, trapeze artist and tumbler. He began working in Hollywood as a stuntman in 1962.  He is survived by his wife, Sue, and his daughter, Bonnie. His son, Michael, died last year.  The new_york_times contributed reporting.  Felix Silla in 1965 as the hairy Cousin Itt with cast of ''The Addams Family'' and, right, in 2017. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WALT DISNEY TELEVISION, VIA GETTY IMAGES; BOBBY BANK/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210426eh4q0002t "
129		"   Classified; SECTD Paid Notice: Deaths; HARRISON, JOHN  51 words 26 April 2021   07     HARRISON--John. With the passing of our great friend John, our hearts are broken. We are so fortunate to have shared many wonderful times together. Our thoughts, prayers and love are with Carol, Wendi and Pam. Abbey and Valerie Asher and Laurie 1/3  Document NYTF000020210426eh4q00005 "
130		"    Despite Losses, C.E.O.s Prosper Amid Pandemic  By David Gelles  1,856 words 25 April 2021   1     While millions of people struggled to make ends meet, many of the companies hit hardest in 2020 showered their executives with riches.  Boeing had a historically bad 2020. Its 737 Max was grounded for most of the year after two deadly crashes, the pandemic decimated its business, and the company announced plans to lay off 30,000 workers and reported a $12 billion loss. Nonetheless, its chief executive, David Calhoun, was rewarded with some $21.1 million in compensation.  Norwegian Cruise Line barely survived the year. With the cruise industry at a standstill, the company lost $4 billion and furloughed 20 percent of its staff. That didn't stop Norwegian from more than doubling the pay of Frank Del Rio, its chief executive, to $36.4 million.  And at Hilton, where nearly a quarter of the corporate staff were laid off as hotels around the world sat empty and the company lost $720 million, it was a good year for the man in charge. Hilton reported in a securities filing that Chris Nassetta, its chief executive, received compensation worth $55.9 million in 2020.  The coronavirus plunged the world into an economic crisis, sent the U.S. unemployment rate skyrocketing and left millions of Americans struggling to make ends meet. Yet at many of the companies hit hardest by the pandemic, the executives in charge were showered with riches.  The divergent fortunes of C.E.O.s and everyday workers illustrate the sharp divides in a nation on the precipice of an economic boom but still racked by steep income inequality. The stock markets are up and the wealthy are spending freely, but millions are still facing significant hardship. Executives are minting fortunes while laid-off workers line up at food banks.  ''Many of these C.E.O.s have improved profitability by laying off workers,'' said Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, who has proposed new taxes on the ultrawealthy. ''A tiny handful of people who have shimmied all the way to the top of the greasy pole get all of the rewards, while everyone else gets left behind.''  For executives who own large stakes in giant companies, the gains have been even more pronounced. Eight of the 10 wealthiest people in the world are men who founded or ran tech companies in the United States, and each has grown billions of dollars richer this year, according to Bloomberg. Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, which saw profits skyrocket with people stuck at home, is now worth $193 billion. Larry Page, a Google co-founder, is worth $103 billion, up $21 billion in the last four months alone, as his company's fortunes have only improved during the pandemic.  And, according to security filings, a select few are rapidly accumulating new fortunes. Chad Richison, founder and chief executive of an Oklahoma software company, Paycom, is worth more than $3 billion and was awarded $211 million last year, when his company made $144 million in profit. John Legere, the former chief executive of T-Mobile, was awarded $137.2 million last year, a reward for taking over the rival Sprint.  ''We've created this class of centimillionaires and billionaires who have not been good for this country,'' said Nell Minow, vice chair of ValueEdge Advisors, an investment consulting firm. ''They may build a wing on a museum. But it's not infrastructure -- it's not the middle class.''  The gap between executive compensation and average worker pay has been growing for decades. Chief executives of big companies now make, on average, 320 times as much as their typical worker, according to the Economic Policy Institute. In 1989, that ratio was 61 to 1. From 1978 to 2019, compensation grew 14 percent for typical workers. It rose 1,167 percent for C.E.O.s.  The pandemic only compounded these disparities, as hundreds of companies awarded their leaders pay packages worth significantly more than most Americans will make in their entire lives.  ''To my mind, they're the logical consequence of our total embrace of shareholder capitalism, starting with the corporate raiders of the 1980s, to the exclusion and sacrifice of all else, including American workers,'' said Robert Reich, a labor secretary under President Bill Clinton. ''The pay packages reflect soaring share prices, which in turn reflect, at least in part, the willingness if not eagerness of corporations to cut payrolls at the slightest provocation.''  AT&T, the media conglomerate, lost $5.4 billion and cut thousands of jobs throughout the year. John Stankey, the chief executive, received $21 million for his work in 2020, down from $22.5 million in 2019.  T-Mobile said it would create new jobs through its merger with Sprint, but has already begun layoffs. It made $3.1 billion in 2020. In addition to Mr. Legere's windfall, the company awarded its current chief executive, Mike Sievert, $54.9 million.  Tenet Healthcare, a hospital chain, furloughed about 11,000 workers during the pandemic, but made nearly $399 million in profit. ''The last 12 months clearly have been an extraordinary challenge and learning experience,'' the company's chief executive, Ronald Rittenmeyer, wrote in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In the same document, Tenet revealed that Mr. Rittenmeyer earned $16.7 million last year.  And L Brands, the owner of Victoria's Secret, cut 15 percent of its office staff and temporarily closed most of its stores during the pandemic. Andrew Meslow, who took over from Leslie H. Wexner as chief executive in February last year, still earned $18.5 million.  ''They always talk about how their employees are the most important assets,'' Ms. Minow said. ''But they sure don't treat them that way.''  Dozens of public companies have already reported paying their C.E.O.s $25 million or more last year, according to Equilar, an executive compensation consulting firm. Several companies that announced major layoffs last year, including Comcast and Nike, have not yet released executive compensation data for last year.  Many companies defended their executive compensation plans. In some cases, C.E.O.s took less than they were entitled to. Most top executives receive the bulk of their pay in shares, which may decrease in value and often vest over several years. And at many companies, the stock price was up despite the turbulence in the economy and regardless of whether the company was profitable.  ''At the end of the day, C.E.O.s end up getting rewarded for how they respond to these external occurrences,'' said Jannice Koors, a compensation consultant at Pearl Meyer who works with companies to determine executive pay. ''If you think about stores closing, furloughs, etc., C.E.O.s are getting rewarded for making those decisions.''  In many ways, the role of corporate chieftains has never been more pronounced. Beyond running their businesses, C.E.O.s have emerged as prominent voices in the national conversations around race, climate change and voting rights.  At the same time, they face critics on all sides. Senator Mitch McConnell recently told companies protesting Republican efforts to overhaul voting laws to ''stay out of politics.'' Meanwhile, labor advocates are calling on companies to take better care of their workers.  ''It's time for the corporations in this nation to play their part in a recovery that can be shared by everybody,'' said Mary Kay Henry, international president of the Service Employees International Union. ''We cannot reinforce the economic inequality that existed before the pandemic.''  Executives at publicly traded companies receive most of their compensation in stock, an arrangement intended to align pay with the performance of a company's share price. When the stock price goes up, the theory goes, investors and executives alike share in the gains.  Defying logic, the stock market has been soaring for months now, more than making up the losses it suffered early in the pandemic. As a result, many chief executives ended the first year of the pandemic having overseen, improbably, a rise in their company's share price. The resilience of the markets, and the sense that Covid-19 was an act of God, not the fault of any one person, helped companies justify big pay packages.  ''Boards were thinking: 'This isn't our management team's fault. This isn't the result of bad planing or lax governance. This kind of happened to everybody,''' Ms. Koors said. ''There was a sense in board rooms that if, despite all this, they managed to deliver on the numbers, who are we to cut those payments in a year when everyone worked their butts off?''  Some investors and corporate governance groups are pushing back on executive compensation plans.  Starbucks shareholders voted last month against the compensation plans for the company's two top executives. The resolution was nonbinding, however, and the chief executive, Kevin Johnson, received $14.7 million in cash and stock last year.  The biggest clash over pay this year is at General Electric, a company still reeling from years of mismanagement. Larry Culp, the chief executive, received $73.2 million last year and could collect well over $100 million more, thanks to a recently updated pay plan. Several prominent corporate governance groups have come out in opposition to Mr. Culp's pay, and investors will vote on the issue at G.E.'s annual meeting next month.  Even when executive pay was slashed, it often remained high. Robert A. Iger, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company, last year earned less than half what he did in 2019, but his compensation was still $21 million. The pay cut was a reflection of the difficult year at Disney, which laid off more than 28,000 people as its theme parks shut down.  At Boeing, Mr. Calhoun voluntarily gave up most of his cash salary this year, taking just $269,231 of the $1.4 million he was entitled to. Still, thanks to stock awards, his compensation was more than $21 million.  ''Dave obviously gave up a lot,'' a Boeing spokesman said in an email.  A Hilton spokesman said the $55.9 million figure reported in the company's annual filing did not reflect Mr. Nassetta's actual pay. Because of the pandemic, Hilton restructured several complex stock awards. As a result, Mr. Nassetta's actual earnings for 2020 will be closer to $20.1 million, a slight decrease from 2019.  ''2020 was an anomaly in so many ways,'' the spokesman said in an email.  Among the C.E.O.s raking in millions are, clockwise from top left, Jeff Bezos of Amazon, Robert A. Iger of Disney, John Stankey of AT&T, Chris Nassetta of Hilton, David Calhoun of Boeing, Kevin Johnson of Starbucks and Frank Del Rio of Norwegian Cruise Line. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CALLA KESSLER/THE new_york_times; CHRIS DELMAS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; PRESLEY ANN/GETTY IMAGES FOR WARNERMEDIA; POOL  BY STEFANI REYNOLDS; WHITNEY CURTIS FOR THE new_york_times; KYLE JOHNSON FOR THE new_york_times; AARON DAVIDSON/GETTY IMAGES FOR NORWEGIAN CRUISE LINE) (A28)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4p0000l "
131		"    Allon Schoener, Curator Whose 'Harlem' Exhibit Drew Outrage, Dies at 95  By Alex Vadukul  1,502 words 25 April 2021   31     His ''Harlem on My Mind'' exhibit at the Met museum in 1969 drew protests for not including works by Black artists. But since then it's been reconsidered.  Allon Schoener, the curator who organized the Metropolitan Museum of Art's infamous 1969 show ''Harlem on My Mind,'' which caused protests that stopped traffic on Fifth Avenue because it didn't include any paintings or sculptures by Black artists, died on April 8 in Los Angeles. He was 95.  His son, Abe Schoener, confirmed the death, at an assisted living facility.  The tumultuous legacy of ''Harlem on My Mind,'' the Met's first landmark show documenting Black culture in America, has been revisited endlessly by critics and historians. But Mr. Schoener's story is less known.  The storm over the exhibition fractured his life. Protesters picketed outside his apartment, he endured threats and intimidation, and he left New York with his family to start anew in rural Vermont. He never worked on a show for the Met again. But he harbored no ill will; he said he welcomed the discourse about diversity that the incident ushered into the art world, though he felt that the whole story had not been told.  ''I think he asked that question until his dying day,'' his son said. '''How can I get my side of things told?'''  In the 1960s, Mr. Schoener was a rising star in the city's museum scene, known for curating immersive ethnographic multimedia shows that explored New York history. Utilizing archival photography, music recordings and wall texts, the exhibitions he developed were engulfing spectacles. Such multimedia events are common today, but his approach was pioneering at the time.  In 1966, when he was assistant director of the Jewish Museum in Manhattan, a show of his there about Eastern European immigrants, ''The Lower East Side: Portal to American Life (1870-1924),'' was a sensation that drew lines down the block. The next year, as the visual arts director of the New York State Council on the Arts, he had another success with an exhibition celebrating the 150th anniversary of the Erie Canal, which he mounted on a barge that floated from Albany to Buffalo with folk musicians performing on its roof.  Soon enough, the Met asked Mr. Schoener if he would organize one of his signature shows there as an outside curator.  His idea was to document Harlem's history through large-scale photographs, newspaper articles, film reels and jazz recordings. ''I hate museums when they are remote from life,'' he told New York magazine at the time. ''This show will really grab the people, an electronic theater.''  Thomas Hoving, the Met's director, eagerly signed off. ''Harlem on My Mind'' opened at the Met in 1969 with blockbuster billing, and some 70,000 people attended the show within its first nine weeks. (The critics were less impressed. In The new_york_times, the conservative-minded Hilton Kramer accused Mr. Hoving of ''politicalizing'' the Metropolitan, while the Jamaican-born author Jervis Anderson, also in The Times, saw the show as ''romanticizing'' Black culture and underpinned by ''white guilt.'')  Alongside the enthusiastic crowds, however, were protesters who marched holding signs that read ''Harlem on Whose Mind?'' They were led by a group of artists, called the Black Emergency Cultural Coalition, who were incensed that the show included no paintings by African-American artists. Joining them were New Yorkers protesting the exhibition's catalog, which included an essay written by a 16-year-old Bronx high school student using anti-Semitic language.  The uproar reached a fever pitch.  Mayor John V. Lindsay threatened to withhold financial support from the museum if it didn't pull the catalog from sale. Mr. Hoving issued a rare mea culpa, saying he had made an ''an error in judgment.'' During the episode 10 paintings were defaced with small ''H's'' scratched into their canvases.  As protesters gathered outside Mr. Schoener's Upper East Side home and clients and colleagues began distancing themselves from him, he and his wife decided to move with their children far from the city. A year later, they settled in Grafton, a small town in southern Vermont. Mr. Schoener began planting an organic garden and chopping his own wood. His children attended a four-room schoolhouse.  He went on to write three photography-based cultural history books, ''The American Jewish Album,'' ''The Italian Americans'' and ''New York: An Illustrated History of the People,'' and to work as a consultant for clients like the Smithsonian.  Over the years, as he watched ''Harlem on My Mind'' become a cautionary art-world tale, Mr. Schoener always felt that several details had been omitted from the popular retelling of the incident. His main contention was that the show didn't include paintings by Black artists because he hadn't intended it to be a fine-art show.  '''Harlem on My Mind' was never conceived of nor presented as a traditional art museum exhibition,'' Mr. Schoener wrote in an essay defending the show in 2015. He added: ''It was an articulated documentary display of photography, films, recorded Harlem voices and music. For this reason, there were no paintings and sculptures, and other traditional 'works of art,' at all.''  Addressing the ''exclusion of Black painting, prints and sculptures,'' he noted that the show celebrated Black photographers, Gordon Parks among them, and that the work of the Harlem photographer James Van Der Zee was discovered during the research for it.  But he concluded, ''Although well intentioned, both the Met staff and I were inexperienced and naïve in dealing with the African-American community.''  As to the student's catalog essay, he had published it to put the voice of a young Black New Yorker in the show, and he said in a 2007 interview with the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art that he acknowledged his lapses in the editing.  In 1995, when the New Press published a new edition of the ''Harlem on My Mind'' catalog, Mr. Schoener was heartened to discover that the show was being reconsidered. The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem organized an event commemorating its release, and the historian Henry Louis Gates Jr. wrote in the introduction that the catalog ''remains, even a quarter century later, one of the richest and most comprehensive records of the history of the African-American in the twentieth century.''  The reissue prompted Michael Kimmelman of The Times to reflect on the show, ''The pity,'' he wrote, ''is that 'Harlem on My Mind,' as you can glean from the reprinted catalog, had its strengths. It was a celebratory exhibition at heart.''  Allon Theodore Schoener was born on Jan. 1, 1926, in Cleveland. His father, Harry, ran a trouser factory. His mother, Ida (Finkelstein) Schoener, was a homemaker. Both his maternal and paternal grandparents arrived at Ellis Island from Lithuania and settled on the Lower East Side.  Allon studied art history at Yale in 1946 and then attended the Courtauld Institute of Art in London before returning to Yale for his master's degree in 1949. He went on to became a curator for the San Francisco Museum of Art and, in 1955, director of the Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Center. He married Mary Heimsath a year later. Mr. Schoener moved to New York in the 1960s to join the Jewish Museum and the New York State Council on the Arts.  In addition to his son, he is survived by a daughter, Rebecca.  Mr. Schoener retired to Los Angeles in 2010. Fiercely political, he was attuned to the roiling conversation about race in America, and he watched as controversies not unlike the one he faced in 1969 started engulfing museums with regularity.  Last year, the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York canceled a show after artists of color objected to the museum's obtaining their work through discounted sales, intended to benefit racial justice charities, without properly compensating them. And the American Museum of Natural History agreed to remove a statue of Theodore Roosevelt -- in which he is portrayed astride a horse flanked by a Native American and an African man -- from outside its entrance in response to protests condemning it as a colonialist symbol.  Mr. Schoener heard such incidents deridingly referred to as examples of ''cancel culture.'' He found that term reductive and simplistic.  ''He was intensely aware of topics in the news like 'cancel culture,''' his son said. ''And he shrugged at it. He thought lots of it was progress. To him it was like, 'Yeah, well, that's the price to pay for change.'''  Allon Schoener, second from left, with staff members of the ''Harlem on My Mind'' exhibition in 1969. With him, from left, were Reginald McGhee, Lelia Nelson and Donald Haynes. The exhibit drew protesters, left, to the Met. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAM FALK/THE new_york_times; J.P. ROTH COLLECTION; JACK MANNING/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4p0000k "
132		"    Cut Emissions of Methane, Main Component of Natural Gas, Report Says  By Hiroko Tabuchi  1,589 words 25 April 2021   24     A major United Nations report will declare that slashing emissions of methane, the main component of natural gas, is far more vital than previously thought.  A landmark United Nations report is expected to declare that reducing emissions of methane, the main component of natural gas, will need to play a far more vital role in warding off the worst effects of climate change.  The global methane assessment, compiled by an international team of scientists, reflects a growing recognition that the world needs to start reining in planet-warming emissions more rapidly, and that abating methane, a particularly potent greenhouse gas, will be critical in the short term.  It follows new data that showed that both carbon dioxide and methane levels in the atmosphere reached record highs last year, even as the coronavirus pandemic brought much of the global economy to a halt. The report also comes as a growing body of scientific evidence has shown that releases of methane from oil and gas production, one of the biggest sources of methane linked to human activity, may be larger than earlier estimates.  The report, a detailed summary of which was reviewed by The new_york_times, singles out the fossil fuel industry as holding the greatest potential to cut its methane emissions at little or no cost. It also says that -- unless there is significant deployment of unproven technologies capable of pulling greenhouse gases out of the air -- expanding the use of natural gas is incompatible with keeping global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, a goal of the international Paris Agreement.  The reason methane would be particularly valuable in the short-term fight against climate change: While methane is an extremely potent greenhouse gas, it is also relatively short-lived, lasting just a decade or so in the atmosphere before breaking down. That means cutting new methane emissions today, and starting to reduce methane concentrations in the atmosphere, could more quickly help the world meet its midcentury targets for fighting global warming.  By contrast, carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, lasts for hundreds of years in the atmosphere. So while it remains critical to keep reducing carbon emissions, which make up the bulk of our greenhouse gas emissions, it would take until the second half of the century to see the climate effects.  Over all, a concerted effort to reduce methane from the fossil fuel, waste and agricultural sectors could slash methane emissions by as much as 45 percent by 2030, helping to avoid nearly 0.3 degrees Celsius of global warming as early as the 2040s, the report says.  While cutting back on carbon dioxide emissions will remain urgent, ''it's going to be next to impossible to remove enough carbon dioxide to get any real benefits for the climate in the first half of the century,'' said Drew Shindell, the study's lead author and a professor of earth science at Duke University. ''But if we can make a big enough cut in methane in the next decade, we'll see public health benefits within the decade, and climate benefits within two decades,'' he said.  The U.N. report, which is expected to be published next month by the Climate and Clean Air Coalition and the United Nations Environment Programme, signals a shift in the global discussion of climate change, which has focused on reducing carbon dioxide, the largest long-term driver of climate change.  Most climate policies -- including net-zero targets set by nations, states and cities as well as businesses -- have tended to focus on longer-term targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions. But methane has begun to gain prominence in the global conversation.  At a climate summit in Washington this week, President Vladimir Putin of Russia, on top of pledging to ''significantly'' reduce the country's emissions in the next three decades, called for a global reduction of methane. ''The fate of our entire planet, the development prospects of each country, the well-being and quality of life of people largely depend on the success of these efforts,'' Mr. Putin said.  Separately, the United States Senate is expected to vote next week to reverse President Donald J. Trump's effort to unravel restrictions on methane emissions that had been put in place during the Obama administration.  ''Methane gets less attention than its big bad brother, carbon dioxide, but in truth methane is like carbon dioxide on steroids,'' Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, said on Thursday.  If the Senate does vote to reverse the policy, it could become the first official reinstatement of one of the many climate regulations that Mr. Trump weakened during his administration.  For scientists who have long focused on methane, its rising prominence in climate policy is a welcome development.  Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere warm the planet by acting like a blanket, trapping the sun's heat. Carbon dioxide is the biggest driver of climate change, but methane is more potent in the shorter term, warming the atmosphere more than 80 times as much as the same amount of carbon dioxide does over a 20-year period.  That's bad news, but it also means that cutting methane emissions may be one of the most effective ways to immediately slow rising global temperatures.  ''You have a near immediate slowdown in the rate of warming,'' said Ilissa B. Ocko, senior climate scientist at Environmental Defense Fund, whose own recent research found that going all-in on reducing methane emissions from the most polluting industries could slow the rate of global warming by 30 percent. ''That's really powerful.''  And while cutting down on carbon dioxide emissions will require sweeping changes to virtually every corner of the economy -- replacing the world's gasoline cars with electric ones, for example, and shuttering almost all of its coal-fired power plants -- shrinking the world's methane footprint might be an easier lift.  Unlike carbon dioxide or most other air pollution, methane isn't released by burning fossil fuels, but comes from leaks and other releases from oil and gas infrastructure, among other sources. A growing body of research has shown that these oil and gas emissions are larger than previously thought, and a likely driver of the global increase of methane in the atmosphere.  ''This means we need to place even more emphasis on the oil and gas sector,'' said Robert Howarth, professor of ecology and environmental biology at Cornell University. He has argued that past assessments overestimated agricultural sources of methane, like cattle ranching, and underestimated emissions from fossil fuels, particularly oil and gas. ''We need independent verification and monitoring of these emissions,'' he said.  Fixing those leaks in theory should pay for themselves by saving money, because capturing the gas means companies capture more product. That potential makes plugging leaks from oil and gas infrastructure the most effective and cheapest way to slow emissions, the U.N. report says.  The world's largest oil and gas companies pledged in 2018 to reduce the proportion of methane released from their operations by one fifth, to less than a quarter of a percentage of the gas they sell, by 2025 -- a target the companies said they reached last year -- with an ambition of achieving 0.2 percent.  Bjorn Otto Sverdrup, chairman of the executive committee of the Oil and Gas Climate Initiative, which represents 12 of the world's biggest oil and gas producers, said the group ''shares the determination to reduce methane emissions.''  He added, ''We have made progress on the ambitions set only a few years back through new measurement and technologies, and we will continue to update our ambitions as we make progress.''  Minimizing methane from landfills also plays a role, as does lowering methane emissions from livestock. But emissions-reduction technologies are less certain in those fields. Releases from livestock, in particular, are expected to make up a growing share of future methane emissions unless there are technological breakthroughs, or the world's top meat consumers change their diets.  Over all, more than half of global methane emissions stem from human activities in three sectors: fossil fuels, landfill and other waste, and livestock and other agriculture. Methane also seeps from wetlands and other natural sources.  The U.N. report also underscores how reducing methane emissions may bring significant public health benefits. Methane is an important contributor to the formation of ozone near the earth's surface. Ozone is known to increase the risk of hospitalizations and early deaths. It also reduces crop yields and forest growth.  Rolling back methane emissions would prevent more than 250,000 premature deaths, and more than 750,000 asthma-related hospital visits, each year from 2030 onward, the report finds. The lower emissions would also prevent more than 70 billion hours of lost labor from extreme heat and more than 25 million tons of crop losses a year.  The flip side is that, with no action, methane emissions may help push the world to the brink of catastrophic climate change. If left unchecked, methane emissions are projected to continue rising through at least 2040, the U.N. report predicts.  ''We're still going wildly in the wrong direction, but we can turn that around very, very quickly,'' Dr. Shindell said. ''We could all use a climate success story.''  A dense California oil field. A U.N. report says the fossil fuel industry could cut its methane emissions at little or no cost. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES SMITH/ALAMY)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4p0000m "
133		"    What the Declaration Means for Armenians And U.S.-Turkey Ties  By Rick Gladstone  1,431 words 25 April 2021   15     After years of avoiding the topic, the U.S. government now officially views the killing of 1.5 million Armenians by the Ottoman Empire a century ago as genocide. Here's what it means.  At the risk of infuriating Turkey, President Biden formally announced on Saturday that the United States regards the killing of 1.5 million Armenians by Turks more than a century ago to be a genocide -- the most monstrous of crimes.  Mr. Biden was the first American president to make such an announcement, breaking with predecessors who did not wish to antagonize Turkey, a NATO ally and a strategically pivotal country straddling Europe and the Middle East.  The announcement carries enormous symbolic weight, equating the anti-Armenian violence with atrocities on the scale of those committed in Nazi-occupied Europe, Cambodia and Rwanda.  Use of the term is a moral slap at President Tayyip Recep Erdogan of Turkey, a fervent denier of the genocide. He has fulminated at other leaders, including Pope Francis, for describing the Armenian killings that way.  What is the origin and meaning of the term genocide?  Genocide is generally defined as the deliberate killing of people who belong to a particular racial, political or cultural group, with the intent to destroy that group.  The term did not exist until 1944, when a Polish Jewish lawyer, Raphael Lemkin, combined the Greek word for race or tribe, ''geno,'' with ''-cide,'' from the Latin word for killing. Mr. Lemkin said the killings of the Armenians and the Holocaust perpetrated by the Nazis shaped his thinking.  While genocide was not yet a legal concept when the Nuremberg tribunal put Nazis on trial after World War II, those proceedings helped lay the groundwork for courts that would later prosecute genocide.  The term was incorporated into a 1948 United Nations treaty that made genocide a crime under international law.  Although partisans in a number of current conflicts have often used the term to discredit and stigmatize opponents, genocide prosecutions are rare. Special courts were created to prosecute crimes including the 1975-1979 genocide in Cambodia, the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, and atrocities including genocide in the former Yugoslavia.  The International Criminal Court, which was created in 2002 in part to prosecute such crimes, has only one pending genocide case -- Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, former president of Sudan, who is wanted on two warrants for crimes including genocide in the Darfur region from 2003 to 2008. The court cannot prosecute crimes committed before its inception.  The International Court of Justice, the highest court of the United Nations, ruled in January 2020 that Myanmar must take action to protect Rohingya Muslims, who have been killed and driven from their homes in what the country's accusers have called a campaign of genocide. The ruling, which has no enforcement power, was the outcome of a lawsuit filed on behalf of Muslim countries that wanted the court to condemn Myanmar for violating the genocide treaty.  What was the Armenian genocide?  Violence against ethnic Armenians is rooted in history of the Ottoman Empire, the predecessor of modern Turkey, which now borders Armenia, a landlocked country that was once part of the Russian Empire.  Starting in 1915, the Ottomans, aligned with Germany in World War I, sought to prevent Armenians from collaborating with Russia and ordered mass deportations. As many as 1.5 million ethnic Armenians died from starvation, killings by Ottoman Turk soldiers and the police, and forced exoduses south into what is now Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East.  About 500,000 Armenians survived, and many eventually scattered into Russia, the United States and elsewhere in what became one of the world's most far-flung diasporas.  The Armenian deaths were once considered the first genocide of the 20th century (many historians now say the German Empire's 1904-1907 campaign of killings and persecution of the Herero and Nama people of Namibia, then known as German South West Africa, was the first).  For many Armenians, the genocide in their homeland is a scar carried down through generations, still evoking strong emotions, aggravated by Turkey's insistence that the genocide is a fiction.  Why has Turkey denied this was a genocide?  Turkey's government has acknowledged that atrocities were committed during that period but has argued that a large number of Turks were also killed and that the Armenian casualty figures are wildly exaggerated. A succession of Turkish leaders have denounced the genocide as a falsehood intended to undermine their account of the creation of modern Turkey.  Turkey's denial of genocide is ingrained into Turkish society. Writers who have dared to use the term have been prosecuted under Section 301 of Turkey's penal code, which bans ''denigrating Turkishness.''  The denial is taught at an early age, with school textbooks calling the genocide a lie, describing the Armenians of that period as traitors and declaring the actions by the Ottoman Turks as ''necessary measures'' against Armenian separatism.  Why had U.S. presidents refrained from calling the Armenian killings a genocide?  Some have come close. President Ronald Reagan tangentially referred to the ''genocide of the Armenians'' in an April 22, 1981, statement commemorating the liberation of the Nazi death camps.  But American presidents have generally avoided describing the killings this way to avoid any backlash from Turkey that would endanger its cooperation in regional conflicts or diplomacy.  What has changed?  As a presidential candidate, Mr. Biden signaled his intentions a year ago in a speech on April 24, Armenia's official day of remembrance of the genocide. He used the term ''Armenian genocide'' and asserted that ''we must never forget or remain silent about this horrific and systematic campaign of extermination.'' And in recent years, bipartisan anger toward Mr. Erdogan has grown. In 2019, the House and Senate passed resolutions calling the Armenian killings a genocide.  As vice president in the Obama administration, Mr. Biden never enjoyed an easy relationship with Mr. Erdogan, an autocratic leader who gave him an icy reception in August 2016. The two met a month after the failed coup in Turkey that Mr. Erdogan blamed on a Turkish cleric living in exile in the United States.  Perhaps more important, Mr. Erdogan's closeness to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Turkey's testy relations with other NATO allies and its purchase of Russian antiaircraft missiles have irritated the Biden administration and both houses of Congress. And Turkey's increasing economic problems under Mr. Erdogan may have made him less likely to retaliate against any American declaration that offends him.  Mr. Biden and Mr. Erdogan held no substantive discussions for the first three months of Mr. Biden's term, an indication that the White House ascribes less importance to Mr. Erdogan as a partner.  Mr. Erdogan had lobbied hard to prevent the announcement, but when the two leaders spoke on Friday, they agreed only to an ''effective management of disagreements,'' according to a summary of the conversation provided by the White House.  About Mr. Biden's decision on the genocide, Turkey's foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, said in a Turkish media interview in recent days that ''if the United States wants to worsen ties, the decision is theirs.''  How many countries recognize the Armenian genocide?  According to a tally by the Armenian National Institute, a Washington-based group, at least 30 countries have done so.  The answer is more complicated concerning the United Nations, which played a central role in the treaty that made genocide a crime but has not taken a position on what happened in 1915 -- 30 years before the global body was created. The website of its Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, in describing the origin of the term genocide, does not mention Armenia. António Guterres, the secretary-general, has skirted the issue.  Asked on Thursday about Mr. Guterres's view, his spokesman, Stéphane Dujarric, said, ''We have no comment, as a general rule, on events that took place before the founding of the U.N.'' Genocide, Mr. Dujarric said, ''needs to be determined by an appropriate judicial body, as far as the U.N. is concerned.''  Lara Jakes contributed reporting.  Clockwise from top: A memorial for victims of the Armenian genocide at a chapel in Antelias, Lebanon; Armin Demirciyan sharing a photo of his grandfather, who survived the genocide as a boy; the Ruins of Ani, once the capital of a medieval Armenian kingdom. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRYAN DENTON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210427eh4p0000j "
134		"   NON The Shortlist / Black History  By Jill Watts  1,091 words 25 April 2021   26     UNTIL JUSTICE BE DONE  America's First Civil Rights Movement, From the Revolution to Reconstruction  By Kate Masur  480 pp. Norton. $32.  Assertions that the modern struggle for civil rights was a ''long movement'' that commenced well before Brown v. Board of Education (1954) have been a subject of recent and ardent debate. While most of these discussions center on the 20th century, Masur, an associate professor at Northwestern, skillfully establishes that ''America's first civil rights movement'' started as far back as the late 18th century. The free states of the North and Midwest, she insightfully argues, constituted a ''post-slavery'' society where resistance to anti-Black laws formed a foundation for later federal legislation and constitutional reform.  Masur's careful study begins with free states and localities passing laws that restricted Black mobility, property rights and access to the justice system. Black communities were subjected to white terrorism and violent treatment by white authorities. Black Americans protested, leading an early push for civil rights. What started out as individual and isolated efforts eventually consolidated into organized resistance with the African Methodist Episcopal Church emerging at the forefront. White abolitionists, along with a few white businessmen and politicians, joined in, sometimes working with Black leaders and at other times driving ahead separately. All activists agreed that Black Americans deserved liberty and property. Still, a significant proportion of whites opposed the Black vote and denied Black humanity.  Some may object to such a broad definition of what constitutes a civil rights movement. But Masur deftly reveals how the loose nature of unlikely antebellum coalitions propelled justice's fight. A milestone came with the case of Gilbert Horton, a free Black man jailed as a fugitive slave in the District of Columbia. His supporters secured his release, arguing that his detention was unconstitutional under the ''privileges and immunities clause.'' This victory, and others like it, eventually influenced key policies during Reconstruction, specifically the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and the 14th Amendment. Masur's account speaks across time, revealing how this federal legislation became the foundation for a new vision.  THE MOVEMENT  The African American Struggle for Civil Rights  By Thomas C. Holt  176 pp. Oxford University. $18.95.  For those seeking to historically contextualize Black Lives Matter, Holt, a professor at the University of Chicago, provides an essential and readable primer on the mid-20th-century civil rights movement. Holt movingly introduces this concise history with the story of his grandmother's brave refusal to take a seat in the back of a bus in 1944. He acknowledges that such activism had antecedents as far back as the 19th century. However, and importantly, he views the post-World War II freedom movement as a unique departure, defining this ''classical'' phase of the civil rights struggle as ''the mass mobilization of Black communities to challenge their racially subordinated civil status.'' Holt rejects, to a degree, the ''long movement'' narrative and instead focuses on mid-20th-century local activism.  The modern push for civil rights, Holt convincingly demonstrates, was first incubated in the rapidly changing cities of the postwar South. Widespread demographic shifts increased Black resistance to Jim Crow. The growth of integrated military bases brought Black soldiers, many who had fought abroad for democracy, into Southern cities, while the empowerment of Black college and high school students fueled nonviolent protest campaigns throughout the urban South. The early agenda of these actions centered on integrating public transportation and public spaces. Later, it shifted to embrace a push for votes and jobs.  Holt adroitly traces the evolution of activism throughout time and across regions. From the cities, the movement spread into rural areas where circumstances were different and, with the intense isolation and grip of white terrorism, more deadly. There, voter registration took priority. Even though the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts were passed in the mid-60s, the escalation of white violence induced some activists to question Gandhian tactics and even integration. As the movement expanded into Northern and Western cities, it adopted separatism and concentrated on education, employment and housing. Its victories over all were limited, but Holt's study illuminates the movement's successful legacy.  JULIAN BOND'S TIME TO TEACH  A History of the Southern Civil Rights Movement  Edited by Pamela Horowitz and Jeanne Theoharis  400 pp. Beacon. $29.95.  Few were better situated to teach the history of the mid-20th-century civil rights movement than the late Julian Bond, who, along with John Lewis and others, founded the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in 1960. This series of inspiring lectures, which Bond delivered in his popular college courses, is an indispensable master class that resonates with the current times. Within a broad synthesis of the freedom movement, Bond reflects stirringly on his own experiences, making this deep dive into civil rights history an engaging memoir as well as a guide for 21st-century crusades for equal rights. The dynamic narrative is made even more so by Danny Lyon's photographs of the era.  Bond grounds the freedom movement in the nascent activism and longer historical transformations of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. As Bond notes, World War II sped up the struggle, then Brown v. Board of Education set a legal precedent for desegregation and the Montgomery bus boycott became the springboard for protest. Like other recent scholars and writers, Bond agrees that successful campaigns for integration and voting rights were rooted in local leadership, activism and agendas.  Significant progress didn't come until the 1960s -- and Bond, drawing heavily from his own experiences, presents SNCC as the main catalyst. Successful student sit-ins at segregated lunch counters throughout the South were the first genuine deployment of nonviolent direct action. These also ''democratized the movement,'' which increased the mobilization and empowerment of the masses. In Southern urban and rural areas, people risked their lives to win the rights legislation of the 1960s. SNCC's turn toward Black nationalism, which Bond views as a tactical mistake (an assertion some will disagree with), combined with Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination, marked the end of the civil rights movement. Yet Bond's message to his students and to us is one of hope: While the quest for equal rights remains unfulfilled, the promise remains.  Jill Watts, a professor of history at California State University, San Marcos, is the author of ''The Black Cabinet: The Untold Story of African Americans and Politics During the Age of Roosevelt.''  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00080 "
135		"    Record Jump in the U.S. Death Rate Last Year  By Denise Lu  538 words 25 April 2021   4     The U.S. death rate in 2020 was the highest above normal since the early 1900s -- even surpassing the calamity of the 1918 flu pandemic.  A surge in deaths from the Covid-19 pandemic created the largest gap between the actual and expected death rate in 2020 -- what epidemiologists call excess deaths, or deaths above normal.  Aside from fatalities directly attributed to Covid-19, some excess deaths last year were most likely undercounts of the virus or misdiagnoses, or indirectly related to the pandemic otherwise. Preliminary federal data show that overdose deaths have also surged during the pandemic.  A new_york_times analysis of U.S. death patterns for the past century shows how much 2020 deviated from the norm.  Since the 1918 pandemic, the country's death rate has fallen steadily. But last year, the Covid-19 pandemic interrupted that trend, in spite of a century of improvements in medicine and public health.  In the first half of the 20th century, deaths were mainly dominated by infectious diseases. As medical advancements increased life expectancy, death rates also started to smooth out in the 1950s, and the mortality rate in recent decades -- driven largely by chronic diseases -- had continued to decline.  In 2020, however, the United States saw the largest single-year surge in the death rate since federal statistics became available. The rate increased 16 percent from 2019, even more than the 12 percent jump during the 1918 flu pandemic.  In 2020, a record 3.4 million people died in the United States. Over the last century, the total number of deaths naturally rose as the population grew. Even amid this continual rise, however, the sharp uptick last year stands out.  Combined with deaths in the first few months of this year, Covid-19 has now claimed more than half a million lives in the United States. The total number of Covid-19 deaths so far is on track to surpass the toll of the 1918 pandemic, which killed an estimated 675,000 nationwide.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 10 percent of the deaths last year can be directly attributed to Covid-19, which overtook other leading causes of death -- like chronic lower respiratory diseases and unintentional injuries, such as car accidents and overdose deaths -- to become the third biggest killer, after heart disease and cancer.  Methodology: Total death numbers for 2020 are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Data for 2020 are provisional because of lags in the reporting of deaths. Historical death numbers and death rates are from the National Vital Statistics System at the C.D.C. and C.D.C. Wonder. Death rates are age-adjusted by the C.D.C. using the 2000 standard population. Not all states were included in data for years before 1933. For earlier years, rates are calculated based only on the population of the states that are included. Expected rates for each year are calculated using a simple linear regression based on rates from the previous five years. The death rate in 1918 was excluded when calculating expected rates.  Additional reporting by Josh Katz.  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007z "
136		"   NON The Weary Titan  By Richard Aldous  1,298 words 25 April 2021   18     THE AGE OF DECADENCE  A History of Britain, 1880 to 1914  By Simon Heffer  ''What fools we were,'' King George V told his prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, in 1930, looking back to the era before World War I. In the context of the wartime catastrophe his generation had delivered, the king may have had a point. That was the time of Rudyard Kipling's ''long recessional'' and A. E. Housman's ''land of lost content.'' Arthur Balfour, prime minister from 1902 to 1905, lamented ''some process of social degeneration'' that ''may conveniently be distinguished by the name of 'decadence.''' Joseph Chamberlain, the most charismatic politician of the late-Victorian age, put it more pithily. ''The Weary Titan,'' he said in 1902, ''staggers under the too vast orb of its fate.''  For many Americans today, perhaps fearing late-stage decadence and their own Weary Titan, this story may strike close to home. For in Simon Heffer's telling, the history of Britain from 1880 to 1914 is one in which ''a nation so recently not just great, but the greatest power the world had ever known, sustained in its greatness by a rule of law and parliamentary democracy, had begun its decay.''  ''The Age of Decadence'' is a successor volume to the same author's well-regarded ''High Minds: The Victorians and the Birth of Modern Britain'' (2013), which charted Britain's rise to ''greatness'' in the earlier part of the 19th century. Heffer picks up here with Gladstone taking over the premiership from his great rival, Disraeli, in 1880, then guides us through the high-Victorian era into the 20th century with the accession of King Edward VII in 1901. He ends in 1914 with Britain facing an unhappy choice between a European war with Germany and a civil war in Ireland. He wisely does not include the origins of the world war substantively in this volume (his book on this topic has just been published in Britain). In such a way he avoids the teleological danger of making everything in Britain about the war as the country hurtles toward some kind of inevitable abyss. In fact, until the last moment, even after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, Ireland seemed the more important priority for Britain.  There are many pleasures to be had in this fine book, not the least of which is the vivacity of Heffer's prose. A columnist for The Sunday Telegraph as well as a historian, he writes elegantly but punchily, combining seriousness with welcome flashes of waspishness that stop things from getting stuffy. Pointing, for example, to the socially entitled Virginia Woolf's sneering at a fellow novelist, the shopkeeper's son Arnold Bennett, Heffer notes that her put-downs ''had him written off for much of the 20th century by generations of university lecturers and critics, who confused snobbery with literary criticism.'' That, as they say, is a twofer.  Heffer has little interest in debates among historians on the period, but unlike many general surveys of this kind, he does not rely just on secondary literature and makes excellent use of wide-ranging archival research. That approach gives the book a fresh perspective, although not necessarily a new one. What is striking about ''The Age of Decadence'' is that it brings us full circle to the view the late Victorians and Edwardians so often had of themselves and it echoes George Dangerfield's seminal 1935 book ''The Strange Death of Liberal England,'' which evocatively depicted how ''by the end of 1913 Liberal England was reduced to ashes.'' In Heffer's telling it is perhaps less ashes to ashes than an overripe piece of fruit rotting and putrefying in front of our eyes.  ''The Age of Decadence'' is a masterpiece of pacing. After an amiable perambulation with the last of the Victorians, we build to a frantic cliff-top scramble as the Edwardians lose their grip on events and themselves. The book culminates in three powerful chapters on the suffragists, industrial unrest and the threat of civil war in Ireland. By the final pages, Heffer has skillfully conjured a country in chaos and heading over the edge. The prime minister, Herbert Henry Asquith, had ''rarely felt more hopeless'' and by July 1914 believed the United Kingdom had reached ''an impasse, with unspeakable consequences.'' The Lord Mayor of Liverpool told the Earl of Derby he feared ''a revolution is in progress.'' In the circumstances, a war with Germany looked to many like the easy option.  Heffer has no hesitation in pointing the finger of blame at the complacent, ''swaggering'' late-Victorian and Edwardian elites who ran the show in these four decades. From 1880 ''until the apocalypse came in 1914,'' he writes reprovingly, ''there was among the upper and upper-middle classes a resting on laurels; a decision, literal and metaphorical, to live off dividends rather than work that little bit harder and improve more.'' The end result: ''Britain was diminished'' and ''British power was in decline.''  Heffer warns us against ''the pornography of nostalgia,'' but still, there are other ways to see the Edwardians. Perhaps this period was not one of Thomas Hardy's times ''when all went well,'' but the Edwardians certainly meet Arnold Bennett's criterion of being ''identified with the great cause of cheering us all up.'' Everything was brighter, faster, more fashionable. With the growth of cinemas, gramophones, telephones and the first 100-miles-per-hour trains for trips to the seaside, Edwardians for the most part had more fun than those stern Victorians. Thanks to advances in medicine and nutrition, people in Britain lived longer (unless they found themselves in the wartime trenches). And everyday life also improved. If this was an era of revolt, it was also one of radical reform, with a long reach into all areas of society from cradle to grave. The daily existence of the working classes on whose backs much of the wealth of the previous century had been built was enhanced immeasurably by a battery of social, industrial and educational legislation. Liberal reform culminated in the comprehensive 1911 National Insurance Act -- one of the most important pieces of legislation of the 20th century and one that remains a foundation of the British welfare state and National Health Service.  Regarding decline as a world power, everything is relative. Twentieth-century Britain overcame rival empires, fought and won two cataclysmic wars and twice reconstructed the world order in its own image. The British retreated from empire once its corrupting decadence became manifest. Historians of other empires might ask whether the Edwardians were any more degenerate than the French of the Third Republic, or imperial Germans, Russians, Ottomans, Iranians and Chinese. Certainly Britain was eclipsed by the United States but arguably there was not much the Edwardians could have done about the rise of a vast, resource-rich continental power that unlike its other rivals was reasonably well governed. Today Britain remains one of the half-dozen richest countries in the world with a cultural and political impact that far exceeds its size. Much of its good fortune is rooted in the legacy of those Edwardians who, as H. G. Wells put it, saw ''The Shape of Things to Come.''  So perhaps in the end the dutiful King George V only had it half right. For while they were often foolish, the Edwardians were no fools.  Richard Aldous is the Eugene Meyer professor of British history and literature at Bard College. His books include ''The Lion and the Unicorn: Gladstone vs. Disraeli.'' THE AGE OF DECADENCE A History of Britain, 1880 to 1914 By Simon Heffer Illustrated. 912 pp. Pegasus Books. $39.95.  King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra in their coronation robes.   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007x "
137		"   NON Flight Path  By Christian Cooper  1,327 words 25 April 2021   11     A WORLD ON THE WING  The Global Odyssey of Migratory Birds  By Scott Weidensaul  ''Given the state of migratory birds around the world, I needed a little good news.''  Coming near the end of ''A World on the Wing: The Global Odyssey of Migratory Birds'' -- Scott Weidensaul's gripping journey alongside the world's feathered wanderers and the people who study them -- these words are necessarily grim. Any longtime birder offers the same lament: Migration just isn't what it used to be.  The plummeting numbers of songbirds and shorebirds, raptors and waterfowl, have become painfully apparent; a recent study collating decades of data revealed that nearly a third of all birds -- three billion creatures -- have vanished from North America in just the last 30 years. Weidensaul tasks himself with communicating to both the knowing birder and the layman the epic scale of what's happening in our skies every year, the whys and hows, while offering rays of hope through the gloomy storm clouds. The success of ''A World on the Wing'' in navigating that challenge rivals the astonishing feats of the birds he chronicles.  Those feats and the jaw-dropping science behind them form the heart of the book. A tiny ruby-throated hummingbird crosses the entirety of the Gulf of Mexico in a single nonstop flight; inconceivable, until Weidensaul describes certain whimbrels -- a shorebird somewhat bigger than a pigeon -- that leave the Canadian Arctic, travel east the width of the continent, and hurl themselves over the North Atlantic, directly into raging seasonal storms whose winds, it turns out, give them a boost for a nonstop transoceanic flight from the Canadian Maritime Provinces to Brazil. Suddenly the hummingbird seems like a slacker.  ''A World on the Wing'' is littered with such wonders: birds who can pack on fat without obesity's downsides, add muscle when and where it's needed, and burn fuel with extraordinary efficiency, qualities that would make endocrinologists, bodybuilders and weight loss gurus salivate. Migrants can even ''see'' the Earth's magnetic field via the quantum entanglement of the electrons in their eyes, an evolutionary trick that is the stuff of science fiction.  Like the Swainson's hawks he studied in California, Weidensaul is returning to familiar territory. His 1999 book, ''Living on the Wind,'' also explored bird migration; the difference this go-round is time and skin in the game. Since the days when he first wrote about the subject, Weidensaul by his own account has steadily been drawn from the role of observer to participant in the hands-on science of migration. This allows him to give us portraits of the scientists and concerned community members alongside whom he has manned the barricades, trying to understand the losses in bird populations and stem them. It's a global cast that includes a former secretary of the Treasury, a ranchero on the pampas of Argentina, a journalist turned conservationist in a remote Baptist region of India. They have a common quest to save birds -- birds whose travels similarly bind disparate parts of the world into an unexpected, fragile whole.  In the time between books, the tools for understanding migration have grown exponentially, and ''A World on the Wing'' dives into these advances. Along with the conservation success stories, this constitutes the most hopeful aspect of the book: that better technology and the metadata of the Information Age have made new insights possible and created the opportunity for effective, targeted solutions to the ills plaguing our migratory birds.  Perhaps most heartening, Weidensaul relates a tale likely familiar to North American birders, if only because we played a critical role in it. California's Central Valley had a problem: Vast agricultural sprawl had replaced wetlands crucial for wintering and migrating birds. Then came eBird, a Cornell Lab of Ornithology and National Audubon Society database of bird sightings created from the contributions of everyday birding enthusiasts. From those data, conservationists were able to determine when migrating wetland birds would be arriving in the region, and they paid farmers to flood their rice fields to coincide with those periods. These pop-up wetlands resulted in lower costs for conservationists compared with outright land acquisition; extra cash in the pockets of farmers; and, most important, five times more birds than in the average Central Valley farm field.  All of this ecological focus, written accessibly without sacrificing an iota of the science, still might have made for some dry reading, if not for Weidensaul's knack for evocative passages and immersive scenes: ''The world was precisely equal halves of gray, divided by the flat line of the horizon -- the smoky silver of an overcast sky, unmarked and smooth, and the darker, mottled granite and charcoal of a mud flat that stretched to every side, paper-thin sheets of water lying on its surface reflecting the clouds or ruffled by the breeze.''  Weidensaul is describing the Yellow Sea, a barren, seemingly lifeless expanse on China's coast that is a banquet hall for millions of migrating shorebirds for whom this is the one and only possible rest stop: ''The flocks came from the south, dense layers of small bodies that undulated and folded into themselves, creating sheets, splitting into tendrils, forming separate tributaries that reunited into great rivers of wings, all moving with tremendous speed.''  At its best, ''A World on the Wing'' brims with spectacle: the silhouettes of a hundred thousand Amur falcons flying past the moon, ten thousand Swainson's hawks soaring against the setting sun before roosting together in eucalyptus trees, waves of colorful warblers moving along the St. Lawrence River in Quebec in one of the greatest shows on Earth -- shows that were once the norm, and now are increasingly rare.  The passion Weidensaul brings to these scenes is personal. ''A World on the Wing'' finds some of its most moving moments early on, when he charts the development of his own interest in birds. As he describes watching the great movements of raptors over Hawk Mountain in Pennsylvania, ''fly-fishing in the air'' to lure a golden eagle into his bander's mist net, or the simple pleasure of celebrating the raucous arrival of Canada geese every spring over his childhood home (''Big Goose Day'' his family called it; ''but it's not like we baked a cake or anything,'' his sister adds), a birder can be forgiven for nodding in recognition. And non-birders can feel enough of the joy that they too might be inspired to partake of the wild.  Spring rushes up the shoots of growing things, and from the towers of New York to the farms of Alabama, from the plains of Manitoba to the wet woods of Cascadia, we know that wings rushing up from the south are not far behind. ''As the light grew around me, the woods, I realized, were seething with birds,'' Weidensaul writes. ''They darted across the narrow trails I followed beneath the oaks, flickers and slashes of motion in my peripheral vision, and flushed before me like a bow wave as I walked -- warblers and sparrows, buntings and orioles, catbirds and thrushes, flycatchers and grosbeaks. This was the kind of day for which my colleagues and I came here.'' As the birds flit through these pages, but with ever less frequency through our lives, we can only hope that birders and non-birders alike take inspiration and a call to action from ''A World on the Wing.'' This is the kind of book we've been waiting for.  Christian Cooper is a board member of the NYC Audubon and the author of the forthcoming memoir ''Better Living Through Birding.'' A WORLD ON THE WING The Global Odyssey of Migratory Birds By Scott Weidensaul Illustrated. 385 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $32.  Trumpeter swans in the skies of Washington State, where they spend the winter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SCOTT TERRELL/SKAGIT VALLEY HERALD, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007v "
138		"   WITH INTEREST Money and U The Week in Business: Time to Buy (or Sell) a House?  By Charlotte Cowles  849 words 25 April 2021   2     Good morning. Have you gotten your vaccine yet? The Biden administration is offering tax breaks to companies that give their workers paid time off to get their shot. Here's what else you should know in business and tech for the week ahead. -- Charlotte Cowles  What's Up? (April 18-24)  Green Ambitions  On Earth Day, President Biden kicked off a virtual climate summit with a guest list of who's who in world power -- including the pope, Bill Gates and President Xi Jinping of China. He put forth a high-flying goal for the United States to slash greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent below 2005 levels by 2030, setting the bar for other leaders to follow suit. The plan is aggressive in scope but vague on specifics. Climate experts say it would require drastic changes in many areas of the country's economy -- too drastic, according to some critics. Think a rapid transition to electric cars, the end of coal-fueled power plants and a vast expansion of wind turbine energy.  The Last Word  Amazon's founder, Jeff Bezos, who is stepping down from his role as the company's chief executive next quarter, addressed a few elephants in the room in his latest (and last?) shareholder's letter. Such as: Even though Amazon workers in Alabama recently rejected a major campaign to unionize, he still thinks that ''we need to do a better job for our employees.'' He also said that workers get bathroom breaks whenever they want (i.e. they do not have to pee in bottles, contrary to what you may read on Twitter). Anyway, what else is new at Amazon? The company is developing a furniture assembly service to compete with the home goods e-commerce giant Wayfair, for one thing. Oh, and opening a hair salon in London where you can preview hairdos virtually before trying them out in real life.  Home Is Where the Wallet Is  The housing market is surging, but when will it reach its peak? According to Google, the search terms ''should I buy a house'' and ''sell my house'' have trended to record highs in recent months. (Same with ''when is the housing market going to crash.'') And it doesn't take much to see why. The pandemic sent people scrambling for more space to live, work and parent comfortably, and rock-bottom interest rates have made mortgages more attractive. But strong demand and tight inventory have pushed home prices up by about 16 percent since the pandemic began. Analysts believe the market will stay strong through the end of the year at least.  What's Next? (April 25-May 1)  iSpy ... Less  Apple introduced its latest slate of products and software last week, including new computer colors -- a mustard-yellow desktop monitor, anyone? As expected, it also revealed the AirTag, a $29 disc that attaches to keys, wallets and other items so they can be tracked down if lost. But slipped in with the jazzy stuff was new privacy software that will make it harder for advertisers to monitor people. The feature will require apps to get explicit permission from users before spying on -- sorry, tracking -- their digital behavior. If people decline, companies that rely on digital advertising (like, say, Facebook) are expected to gather less data about users' activity.  Tax Dollars at Work  Mr. Biden rolled out a new plan that would raise taxes on the rich to reduce costs for child care and education. The proposals align with his campaign promise to increase taxes on corporations and the wealthy, but not on households earning less than $400,000. Still, Wall Street wasn't happy about it, and the stock market fell after his announcement. Mr. Biden is expected to defend his ideas when he gives his first address to a joint session of Congress on Wednesday.  Menthol's Moment  The tobacco industry has heavily marketed menthol cigarettes specifically to Black communities for decades, and they are used by 85 percent of Black smokers. (Because of their flavor, menthol cigarettes are considered easier to get hooked on and harder to quit.) As a result, Black Americans suffer disproportionate health consequences of addiction to menthol cigarettes. This Thursday, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration will respond to a court order that compels it to take a position on whether to ban the product. But it's complicated. Some critics of the ban say that it could cause police to more aggressively target Black Americans suspected of selling illegal cigarettes.  What Else?  HBO Max is gaining ground in the streaming wars, and Netflix's dominance is waning. Tesla's stock dipped after a fatal crash involving one of its auto-piloting cars with no one behind the wheel. And regulators are investigating Credit Suisse after a series of investment scandals, most recently millions of dollars in loans it made to the collapsed investment fund Archegos Capital Management.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Giacomo Bagnara FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007u "
139		"   FEATURE  Seth Rogen's Fountain Of Youth  By Jonah Weiner  8,184 words 25 April 2021   28     To hear more audio stories from publishers like The new_york_times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.  Seth Rogen's home sits on several wooded acres in the hills above Los Angeles, under a canopy of live oak and eucalyptus trees strung with outdoor pendants that light up around dusk, when the frogs on the grounds start croaking. I pulled up at the front gate on a recent afternoon, and Rogen's voice rumbled through the intercom. ''Hellooo!'' He met me at the bottom of his driveway, which is long and steep enough that he keeps a golf cart up top ''for schlepping big things up the driveway that are too heavy to walk,'' he said, adding, as if bashful about coming off like the kind of guy who owns a dedicated driveway golf cart, ''It doesn't get a ton of use.''  Rogen wore a beard, chinos, a cardigan from the Japanese brand Needles and Birkenstocks with marled socks -- laid-back Canyon chic. He led me to a switchback trail cut into a hillside, which we climbed to a vista point. Below us was Rogen's office; the house he shares with his wife, Lauren, and their 11-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Zelda; and the converted garage where they make pottery. I was one of the first people, it turns out, to see the place. ''I haven't had many people over,'' Rogen said, ''because we moved in during the pandemic.''  Coyote paw prints pocked the trail. Water burbled somewhere beneath us. It was an idyllic scene disturbed only by Rogen's phone, which was vibrating madly with messages. That morning, Houseplant, the cannabis company he co-founded in 2019 in Canada, his native country, officially started selling its own weed strains in California. Within moments of the launch there was an hourlong wait to enter the web store, and before long the whole site crashed under the weight of Rogen-loving hordes clamoring to buy what he described as his personally ''hand-smoked'' nugs. (The company also sells stoner home goods, like a blocky, Bauhausian table lighter designed to be impossible to lose.) ''Crazy day,'' he said, tapping at his screen. ''I'm literally responding to people on Twitter, telling them we're working on it -- doing my own customer-service strategy, basically!''  Rogen's overwhelmingly casual demeanor -- chucklingly agreeable, continually stoned -- has long belied his productivity: He has been working almost constantly since he was 13, when he started doing stand-up comedy around Vancouver. But it's still easy to mistake him for a less frenetically ambitious person. A few weeks before I visited, we scheduled a 9:30 a.m. video call, during which, right up top, I watched him light a chubby joint. ''I smoke weed all day,'' he said. ''You'll see that when we're together.'' He punctuated this with a warm burst of laughter familiar to anyone who has spent 10 seconds in conversation with him: a low, gravelly cackle, like Chewbacca doing his best Fran Drescher.  Rogen was readying the release of ''Yearbook,'' a humor collection he'd spent nearly three years writing. But on social media, besides some posts about the book and about Houseplant, he'd mostly been making fun of Ted Cruz and posting pictures of his own trippy ceramic creations: undulating wide-mouth vases with speckled fluorescent finishes, nubby-glazed ashtrays with concave joint-holders affixed to their lips. And so I'd gotten it into my head that Rogen had downshifted into something of an early-retirement rhythm -- the superstar comedian approaching middle age, shuffling between his memoirs and his pottery wheels, with nothing left to prove and nothing particularly urgent to do.  I was wrong. ''Right now I'm writing two movies with Evan,'' he told me, referring to his lifelong friend and collaborator, Evan Goldberg, with whom Rogen began writing screenplays in eighth grade and with whom he founded the production company Point Grey. ''One's called 'Escape,' which hasn't been announced and no one knows about, that we've been working on for years, which hopefully we'll make next year. And then we're writing this movie for Luca Guadagnino'' -- the ''Call Me by Your Name'' director -- ''about Scotty Bowers, this Hollywood hustler from the '40s. And we're producing a new Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles animated movie.'' On top of these projects were two others, in different media, that he asked me not to name, and then there was Houseplant. ''On a given day I work on seven different things, probably, in little chunks,'' he said, then puffed on the joint, shrugging. ''But I don't have kids!''  At 39, Rogen himself remains admirably childlike. A quarter century since he first set foot on a comedy-club stage, he has somehow preserved the openness of that 13-year-old, never quite hardening into a settled form. ''It's something I chase -- that feeling of, Oh, this thing is working. Now this thing is working,'' he said. Rogen set out knowing exactly what he wanted to do with his life -- make people laugh, smoke weed and hang out with his friends -- and somehow managed to turn those three goals into the organizing principles of his whole career.  We descended the hillside, and Rogen got a call: The web store was back up. ''Fantastic,'' he said, swiping over to Twitter to share the news as we strolled over to his pottery workshop. ''Ceramics is something else that having kids would make impossible,'' he told me. When the subject of childlessness arises in interviews, Rogen likes to half-joke that he and Lauren did the math and decided they'd rather not have kids, and enjoy a life of continued freedom and risk, maybe regretting this decision for ''a couple years before we die'' than have kids now, dislike the life change tremendously and regret it for ''the next 50 years.''  The workshop smelled, unsurprisingly, dank. ''There are probably some roaches sitting around,'' he said. Through Houseplant, and on his own, Rogen has advocated for expunging criminal records that stem from marijuana arrests, and he is heartened by the drug's steady creep toward legalization in the United States. He stressed that its illegality was ''racist.'' He went on: ''It's insane to arrest people for something that never should have been illegal in the first place. It's just a way to put Black people in jail.''  Mark Rogen, Seth's father, told me that his son suffered from an undiagnosed attention-deficit disorder as a kid, until ''the miracle of marijuana changed his life -- we had him on a strict diet that helped keep him in balance, but it wasn't 100 percent. Marijuana finally made his cells relax.'' Rogen compares his own weed habit to wearing shoes: He could probably make it through a day without it, but ''it's just not how I would prefer to be feeling.'' He acts stoned, he directs stoned, he does interviews stoned. Absent the cultural stigma around marijuana, Rogen said, ''it's just a tool we use to make our experience more palatable, and some people need those tools a lot more than others. For me it's like shoes. For you it might be like sunglasses. Not everyone's the same. If someone doesn't need to smoke weed? Great. It's the same as someone telling me they don't wear glasses. 'Mazel tov! You don't wear glasses. I do!'''  The pottery studio was cluttered but clean. There were three wheels and a kiln, and several worktables covered with test tiles for trying out new glazes, freeze-dried treats for Zelda and ceramics in various states of completion. Rogen's pottery is good -- sometimes astonishingly so -- and the images he posts online routinely generate hundreds of thousands of likes. ''I've spent years working on movies that fewer people pay attention to than a vase I spent 40 minutes on,'' he said, laughing.  Rogen credited Lauren, who is also an actor and filmmaker, with encouraging him to try ceramics. ''She made all the stuff in our house,'' he said. But it was the late L.A. artist Ken Price -- best known for his gloopily biomorphic, wild-hued sculptures -- who first piqued Rogen's interest in the form. ''I went to his last show at LACMA in 2012, the one Frank Gehry did the installation for,'' Rogen recalled. ''It's the first time I saw ceramics and said, 'What the [expletive] is happening here?''' It was at this moment that Rogen noticed my T-shirt, which was printed with images of Price's ceramics. ''Where did that come from?!'' he asked, delighted. ''That's amazing. I need that.''  Rogen has collected art for several years, with a focus on Pop and street art. In addition to a trove of vintage ashtrays he began amassing as a teenager, he showed me some painted sculptures by Barry McGee, figurines by KAWS and a large color drawing by George Condo. With ceramics, Rogen found a practice that spoke to both the left and right sides of his brain. He flipped open a notebook in which he'd written the chemical breakdowns of various glaze recipes. ''This reminds me of the camera side of filmmaking, which is very scientific and technical, and which I actually understand really well,'' he said. ''It's funny, whenever it's revealed to someone that I know about cameras, they're surprised, and it's, like, I make movies!''  Rogen held up a vase he'd glazed with a multitude of wormy Cronenbergian protuberances. ''This one's gross,'' he said, not unlovingly. ''But what I love about it is it makes you want to touch it.'' He showed me a more immediately pleasing one, with a saucer-shaped mouth and squat body he'd glazed with psychedelic swirls of blues, greens, reds and oranges, evoking a gasoline rainbow. ''Beauty was not emphasized in the filmmaking climate that I grew up in,'' Rogen said. ''And we were never trying to make our work beautiful. We were trying to make it feel real and accessible and grounded.'' He went on: ''We were always trying to serve comedy, and beauty doesn't always serve comedy.'' Recently, he said, he'd started wondering what a beautiful Seth Rogen comedy might look like.  Rather than a hobby indulged in a vacuum, ceramics had become deeply enmeshed with Rogen's sense of himself as a creative person -- and had occasioned epiphanies he wanted to weave back into moviemaking. He talks about the meditative appeal of throwing clay, and about the particular pleasure, for someone who works in the increasingly dematerialized ''content'' industry, of a creative endeavor oriented around tactile artifacts. Beyond this, he told me, ceramics offered him an outlet for experimental impulses that were harder to chase in his day job: Making movies, he often felt that ''there's too much money involved to be truly experimental. When someone's given you $40 million, is that really the time to be trying things you're not sure are gonna work? But what pottery has shown me is there is actually a lot more experimenting we could be doing.'' For instance, ''I was watching the making of 'Phantom Thread,' and Paul Thomas Anderson is trying out 300 different film stocks -- it's not like Evan and I don't want to do that, but they don't let us do that. And we're probably not fighting hard enough to do that.''  Under quarantine, as a kind of bonding exercise, Point Grey started a virtual movie club for its 13 employees. On occasion, directors and actors themselves joined video calls to discuss films they'd worked on: Amy Heckerling (who talked about making ''Clueless''), James L. Brooks (''Terms of Endearment''), Keanu Reeves (''The Matrix'') and Nancy Meyers, among others. One week, Alfonso Cuarón popped in to talk about ''Y Tu Mamá También,'' and something he said lodged in Rogen's head. ''He talked about making that movie after he'd made some big studio films,'' Rogen recalled. ''And he said: 'With this one, we wanted to make the movie we would have made before we even went to film school, as though we knew nothing. Any idea we had, we would do it, even if it seemed crazy or stupid or pretentious or whatever. We wouldn't think about, Oh, it's been done, or people will hate that, or that's too weird.'  ''It was so cool to hear him talk about that,'' Rogen went on, ''because -- speaking to experimentation -- he'd been locked into this thing where he was making big, expensive movies very early in his career, and then he kind of went back and said, No, this is what I want to do: Reset what I'm known for and take insane swings.''  Rogen built his comedic persona around the prerogatives of adolescence in real time: He started out telling summer-camp and Jewish-grandparent jokes in his stand-up act, improvising scenes on the NBC high school sitcom ''Freaks and Geeks'' and co-writing what would become the 2007 smash hit ''Superbad.'' Working on early drafts of that script in eighth grade with Goldberg, Rogen told me: ''It was, like, we're writing our favorite movie of all time, because it doesn't exist. There are movies we like, but there's no movie that's us, with all the things we specifically want out of a movie: It's about teenagers, they're trying to buy booze, they're trying to get laid, they're failing, there are cops, they're stupid. ... ''  This preoccupation has persisted into Rogen's adulthood, from his 2007 star turn in Judd Apatow's ''Knocked Up,'' in which he played a 20-something dude jostled out of an extended adolescence by an unexpected pregnancy after a drunken hookup, to ''Long Shot'' (2019), in which he played a 30-something dude who shares an adolescent bond with a politician (Charlize Theron) and works to remind her of her youthful ideals even as she works to disabuse him of what she sees as his stubborn naïveté. Through Point Grey (named for the secondary school he and Goldberg attended), Rogen has put out ''Good Boys'' and ''Blockers,'' wildly profitable R-rated teen comedies. Last year, he voiced a teenager on ''Big Mouth.'' He has said that he envisions Point Grey's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles reboot as ''a great action-adventure movie that's also a great teenage movie.''  I asked Rogen what it was about youth he found so compelling. ''That time in your life is very fertile for good stories,'' he said, ''in the sense of lessons learned, things that are formative to you, things where you thought one thing then thought another. ... '' He mulled it over a bit more. ''I think a ton about organization -- that's a word, creatively, that comes into my head a lot. People crave stories because what stories do is organize experiences in ways that make them make sense. Like, the world is very scary and chaotic-feeling,'' and youth is ''the time in people's lives that feels it could use the most organizing. It's the least-reconciled part of a lot of people's lives: 'What do I do with that?'''  Rogen devotes much of ''Yearbook,'' which comes out next month, to organizing his own early life. He began writing it two and a half years ago, he said, ''when Evan had his second kid and I had nothing to do for a few months.'' His goal wasn't to impart ''life lessons,'' he emphasized, just to be an affable raconteur: Rogen's best movies feel like great hangs, after all, so why not make his writing feel the same way? Or as he put it: ''I read Steve Martin's book'' -- ''Born Standing Up'' -- ''and I was like, this is a beautiful memoir of one of the most influential people in comedy. That's not what I'm going for!''  Rogen got in touch with old classmates, some of whom he hadn't spoken to in ages, asking for permission to use their names in the book, and for their own recollections too. ''This guy Saul Moscovich, who is the guy I first smoked weed with, I haven't talked to him since I was 17,'' Rogen said, ''but it was funny getting his perspective on the first time we got high in the ravine behind our school.''  Rogen's adolescence in Vancouver was, in his telling, an essentially untroubled one -- he remarks in ''Yearbook'' that his life has been relatively low on adversity and mercifully unmarred by tragedy. When he was growing up, Rogen says, his family ''did not have a ton of money.'' This seems to have bothered him more than it did his parents, whom Rogen describes as resolutely anti-careerist ''radical Jewish socialists.'' His mother, Sandy, worked as a cashier and later as a social worker. As part of his student advocacy work at a local community college, Mark opened a game room, signing out table-tennis paddles; later he worked for nonprofits. (Rogen has an older sister, Danya, who is now a social worker, too.)  ''Mark always said to our kids, 'Never do anything just for the money,''' Sandy told me recently. ''We were very lefty, very socialist, and tried to instill that in them: 'You have to share.' We always had people living in our house. Five or six people who had left their marriages and had nowhere to go, they came and lived with us and they weren't separate from us -- they were part of the family.''  In addition to his childhood issues with attention, Rogen says he has a mild case of Tourette's syndrome. ''I knew when he was 4 that he would not be able to sit in school,'' Sandy said, recalling Seth's ''night terrors and tantrums,'' which abated after they put him on the doctor-prescribed diet. ''We took him off dairy, wheat, sugar, yeast -- everything good,'' she said. Nonetheless, until about seventh grade, Mark said, they ''spent almost as much time at his school as he did,'' summoned to the vice principal's office to discuss Seth's behavior. Rogen would fidget incessantly, leave his seat and interrupt class, antagonizing teachers. ''He was really smart and could take things teachers said and twist them against them,'' Mark recalled, ''making the class laugh at them and embarrassing them.'' Sandy added that Seth would ''make some teachers cry -- but one of his favorite teachers used to tell us she had to send him out of the classroom because he was making her laugh so hard.''  Seth painted, drew and enlisted Sandy's help in fashioning costumes. ''He'd say, today I have to be Batman, today I have to be a cowboy, today I have to be Abraham Lincoln,'' she told me. After Seth saw ''The Terminator,'' Mark recalled, he made himself a stunningly elaborate ''replica of the Terminator's gun'' using duct tape, electrical tape, paper-towel and toilet-paper rolls. ''That gun was amazing,'' Sandy said.  By high school, Rogen had mellowed significantly -- he played rugby, studied karate and won a provincial championship with the Point Grey improv team. (The brilliant comedian Nathan Fielder, it happens, was a teammate.) But he remained an idiosyncratic kid who dyed his hair green, wore a leather L.A. Raiders cap inspired by Ice Cube and, at 16, shared a subjectivity-obliterating 18-gram dose of psilocybin mushrooms with Goldberg in a local forest known as the Endowment Lands. ''We lost our minds,'' he told me, adding that, in the years since, he has experienced shroom-abetted ego death ''like, 25 times.''  That same year, Rogen successfully auditioned for a role on ''Freaks and Geeks,'' the cult high school series created by Judd Apatow and Paul Feig. Mark and Sandy were each laid off from their jobs before the gig materialized, and Rogen has suggested that ''if there was any kind of dark, driving force'' behind his early ambitions, it was most likely his desire for ''some sense of financial security.'' He became the family breadwinner, but this didn't much change the household dynamic, because his parents had long instilled in their kids an everybody-pitches-in mentality. Rogen remembers their spending a chunk of the gift money from his bar mitzvah on a washer-dryer. Sandy told me, ''I feel slightly guilty that Seth felt any pressure about money'' -- then added, with a laugh, ''Mark doesn't.''  When I asked Rogen's parents if anything surprised them about the adult he became, Mark replied: ''It surprises me that he's such a workaholic! It's kind of like Alex Keaton'' -- Michael J. Fox's character on ''Family Ties'' -- ''this thing where the family is lefty and the son is right-wing. We were so laid back! Sandy was home with the kids for seven years, and I had low-paying jobs, and we worked because we had to, not because it was our life's ambition. And now Seth is multitasking on 10 projects at any given moment.'' Seth laughingly acknowledged to me that he ''might have gone in the complete opposite direction'' of his parents, but that, when it came to his career aspirations, ''They never said, Hollywood is [expletive], wear bare feet and frolic the fields. They said, If this makes you happy, do it.''  All artworks are tethered to the moment of their making, but that's especially true of comedy, where the perspectives, references and rhythms that animate jokes can date them -- sometimes fatally -- far more readily than, say, an outmoded hairstyle. Lately, comedy's radioactive half-life has seemed to only accelerate, as cultural attitudes surrounding sex, identity and privilege are renegotiated precipitously, and this is especially true of comedies situated as squarely as Rogen and Goldberg's have been in the world of men.  Rogen has addressed this renegotiation in interviews, acknowledging that there are jokes he made at the start of his career that he wouldn't make today, and that he proceeds with more sensitivity now than he did in his 20s. He characterizes this not as a case of self-censorship but as a particularly high-stakes example of what any comedian fundamentally wants to do, which is exhibit control over his or her material: ''I want to know when I am crossing the line, and I also want to convey to the audience, in some subtle way, that I'm aware of the lines,'' Rogen told New York magazine in 2018. ''Audiences get nervous when they don't trust that the filmmakers fully understand what they're doing; you want to know that the people making the offensive jokes understand what's offensive about them.''  Films like ''Superbad'' and ''Pineapple Express'' meet this standard -- for the most part. When the pubescent protagonists of the former issue idiotic declarations about the psychologies of the girls they obsess over, the movie makes it abundantly clear they have no idea what they're talking about. ''Pineapple Express'' (2008) includes a shadowy group of drug dealers referred to only as ''the Asians,'' in the Orientalist style of the lug-headed '80s action movies Rogen and Goldberg are pastiching. You can read this as a meta commentary on Hollywood racism, even if you debate its ultimate success.  At bottom, though, Rogen's movies are sweet, fumbling love stories about sweet, fumbling dorks, and this has helped them age well. In ''Yearbook,'' we encounter a poignant encapsulation of this sensibility. When Rogen was 12, he writes, inspired by the 1993 Val Kilmer western ''Tombstone,'' he amassed a wardrobe of thrift-store vests that he paired with a pocket watch. Attending classmates' bar and bat mitzvahs, he describes how ''a slow song would come on, boys would ask girls to dance, girls would ask boys to dance and I'd generally find myself standing on the side watching it all happen, spinning my pocket watch like some sort of 1920s mafia snitch.''  One weekend, hugging the wall at a bat mitzvah, Rogen noticed ''two other guys also standing on the sidelines, watching with longing as the other kids had fun.'' With a sinking feeling, he recognized himself in them. But then ''I noticed two OTHER guys. They weren't standing on the side, watching with longing. They actually seemed like they wanted nothing to do with the girls or the boys or the dancing or any of that.'' These boys -- Evan Goldberg and Sammy Fogell (who would go on to inspire the character McLovin in ''Superbad'') -- were happily picking up ''discarded glow sticks, cutting them open and pouring the glowing noxious goop that was inside all over their hands,'' Rogen recounts. He went over and started cracking open the glow sticks, too -- he'd found his people.  Rogen captures something in this moment that's both geeky and precious. Perched on the symbolic precipice of adulthood, troubled by hormonal disturbances, nascent anxieties and social pressures, three friends find safe harbor in one another's company. It's Rogen and Goldberg's origin story, reverberating throughout their creative partnership. ''Our brains formed around working with one another,'' Rogen told me. ''Your brain is not fully formed when you're 13, and that's when we started sitting down to write together.'' Decades later, he went on, ''we've been able to keep that childlike energy of just working on the thing that you want to be doing, the thing you want to watch, the thing that's really just for you.''  In Danny Boyle's film ''Steve Jobs,'' Rogen appears opposite Michael Fassbender, who plays Jobs, as a supportive but aggrieved Steve Wozniak, the Apple co-founder. Even though Aaron Sorkin wrote the script, when Rogen is onscreen, you can glimpse the Point Grey version of the film: two mismatched bros -- the inventor and the marketer -- hanging out in a Cupertino garage, balancing shared affections and aspirations against festering resentments. In their films, Rogen and Goldberg love nothing so much as stories about friends whose abundant love for each other is tested -- by power imbalances between them, by weaknesses of character, by societal forces tugging them apart. This is the emotional engine at the core of ''Superbad'' (2007, an impending college departure threatens a friendship); ''The Green Hornet'' (2011, pampered arrogance threatens a friendship); ''This Is the End'' (2013, Hollywood threatens a friendship); and ''The Interview'' (2014, diverging career goals threaten a friendship).  One of my favorite Rogen comedies is a bleak exception: Jody Hill's ''Observe and Report'' (2009), in which Rogen plays a reactionary mall cop with bipolar disorder, delusions of grandeur and no friends to speak of. Rogen's greatest script with Goldberg, ''Pineapple Express,'' which David Gordon Green directed, also inverts the typical structure: Amid a life-threatening adventure, a friendship blossoms.  In ''Knocked Up,'' Judd Apatow framed goofy adolescent bliss as an entertaining but ultimately stunted condition that Rogen's protagonist had to reluctantly outgrow. The movie grossed $220 million and made Rogen an unlikely star. But in the films he has made with Goldberg, the advent of maturity is treated with more ambiguity, if not outright skepticism. In their hands, adolescence is not merely a stage of life but a state of mind, where the exploratory, joyful fumbling of childhood has yet to give way to the compromises and conformities imposed on us by a fraudulent adult world. Goldberg told me that he and Rogen share a ''philosophical bent'' that stems from adolescence: ''We're irked by people who say, 'This is how it should be, and I know what's right.' No one knows what's right, the entire universe is madness. So people who proclaim to know how other people's lives should be lived irk us -- and those people tend to look down on young people.''  The most radical expression of this mentality comes at the end of ''Sausage Party,'' a 2016 animated feature about anthropomorphic supermarket foodstuffs that have been taught paradise awaits them upon being purchased, then discover the grim truth and rebel. Voiced by actors like Rogen, Kristen Wiig and Salma Hayek, the heroes question the belief system that has kept them docile and, in the finale, become violent revolutionaries, massacring their oblivious human oppressors in the supermarket aisles before enjoying a wildly uninhibited pansexual victory orgy. Writing sequences like these, Rogen told me, he and Goldberg ''will look at each other and say, I bet this is partially because we did a lot of mushrooms when we were in high school.''  ''Whoa,'' Rogen said, checking his phone in the ceramics studio. The Houseplant web store was not merely back, but it was looking as if everything was going to sell out by day's end. ''Part of me was, like, will anyone buy this [expletive]?'' he admitted. ''Like, our movies cost $15 to go see, most people see them for free now. Will someone pay $100'' for an ashtray and a vase?  For Rogen, Houseplant represented a ''big swing'' of the sort he liked hearing Cuarón champion. Rogen had taken to calling the cannabis company ''his life's work,'' and he assured me he didn't mean this jokingly. ''It feels like something I'm more uniquely. ... '' He thought for a second. ''More people could make comedies than could do this,'' he said.  All the same, I asked if he was plotting some big cinematic swing too. ''The thing with our movies is, we're always trying to do that,'' he replied. '' 'Sausage Party' was a big swing. As we were making 'This Is the End''' -- a movie about the Rapture, set in Hollywood, in which Rogen and a host of other celebrities like Rihanna and Jonah Hill played versions of themselves -- ''we were saying, this is an experiment.'' He laughed. ''And then I'd argue that 'The Interview' is an experiment that maybe went awry!''  ''The Interview'' is the second movie Rogen and Goldberg directed, and it doesn't feel like much of an overstatement to say it had the most turbulent rollout in the history of Hollywood. The movie is about a Ryan Seacrest-style TV host (James Franco), whom the C.I.A. enlists, along with his trusted producer (Rogen), to assassinate Kim Jong-un during an interview. Any putative stoner comedy where you find yourself rooting for C.I.A.-backed regime change deserves, at least, a hard sidelong glance, and if the film weren't so thoroughly silly, you could argue that it is, on some level, pro-U.S. propaganda.  This was the vociferously held position of North Korea, at any rate. Its state-news agency promised ''stern'' and ''merciless'' retaliation ahead of the film's release, with the country's United Nations ambassador calling it ''an act of war'' in June 2014. That November, after a historic cyberattack on Sony Pictures servers that the F.B.I. linked to North Korean hackers, thousands of internal company emails were leaked, leading to the resignation of Amy Pascal, the studio boss at the time. In a last-minute swerve, citing safety concerns, Sony yanked ''The Interview'' from theaters and gave it a streaming-only release (a rehearsal, it turned out, for pandemic-era upheavals in distribution).  Rogen was somehow able to take all this in relative stride, even growing accustomed to the full-time security guard hired to protect him. It was easier, it turned out, to abstract himself from geopolitical strife than from bad reviews. ''What's painful,'' he said, ''is the joy people seemed to take in deriding it,'' by which he meant ''major publications who took the time to write articles that were, like, And by the way, this movie sucks. Yes, it's the center of a major controversy, but don't let it be lost on you that it's also terrible.'' Rogen laughed with a mixture of mirth and bitterness. The saga left him feeling ''gun shy,'' he said. ''It was something that for sure felt like we burned our hands on the stove. I don't think it's a coincidence that we haven't directed a film since.''  Last July, Rogen found himself at the center of a relatively more muted international controversy. During an interview with Marc Maron, Rogen articulated his conflicted thoughts about Israel -- the country where his parents met, on a kibbutz, and where he traveled as a teenager. Rogen told Maron that, growing up, he was ''fed a huge amount of lies'' about Palestinian claims to the land: ''They never tell you that, oh, by the way, there were people there,'' he told Maron. ''They make it seem like it was just sitting there, like, the [expletive] door's open.'' As for the basic notion of a Jewish state, he added, ''You don't keep something you're trying to preserve all in one place,'' especially not ''when that place is proven to be pretty volatile, you know? I'm trying to keep all these things safe, I'm gonna put them in my blender.''  Outcry followed, with some Jewish voices celebrating Rogen for speaking tough truths and other, more conservative ones denouncing him. The Maron interview, Rogen said, ''put people in a funny situation where they had to say I'm anti-Jewish, which is a hard thing for me to wrap my head around.'' As a kid, Rogen attended Jewish day school and Jewish summer camps. Last year, after the death of his mother-in-law from Alzheimer's, Rogen developed a greater appreciation for what he calls Judaism's ''practical'' aspects. ''When you look at what Jews do after death, you go to work, you get the body together, you hang out together, you get food, you get alcohol: There's infrastructure in place to deal with these things that are truly hard to deal with,'' he said. He was especially struck by the "
140		"stark finality of one ritual in particular: ''You bury the body yourselves,'' he said. ''It's crazy -- you're dumping dirt on the body.''  Rogen conceded that his remarks on Maron's podcast had been ''flippant'' and that, after the interview, Lauren told him, ''You know this is a very sensitive subject for people, but you're speaking like you don't, and that's where you seem stupid, and not who you are.'' But he emphasized that, at root, he didn't say anything he didn't believe. Rogen told me: ''That was in some ways the last taboo, for me as a Jewish comedian, saying that about Israel. It was the one thing, almost, I would never talk about, and probably part of this bad-instinct O.C.D. part of my brain that's, like, when someone says, 'Don't touch that one button,' part of me says, 'What would happen if I did?'''  ''Let me get my computer and show you something,'' Rogen said. He closed up the garage and we made for a sunny second-story deck adjoining his office, where he rolled himself a fresh joint -- a proprietary Houseplant strain known as Diablo Wind, named after a weather pattern that affects Northern California. ''It's a pretty strong sativa,'' he explained. ''A good work-throughout-the-day weed.''  Rogen had come to accept that his and Evan's chance ''to be the biggest names in movies has come and gone,'' he said. But rather than demoralizing him, this insight was freeing, and now he and Goldberg were plotting their return to filmmaking with a project unlike anything they'd done: ''A big action movie,'' as Rogen put it, called ''Escape,'' that was heavily inspired by Buster Keaton and Jackie Chan.  ''Escape'' grew out of a challenge the duo set for themselves to try and make people laugh without using dialogue. In ''Pineapple Express,'' Rogen explained, ''the scenes people remember are the fights, the foot through the windshield and, like, with 'Neighbors,' you think of the airbags'' -- moments, that is, of outsize physical comedy. ''We were like, Why are those just the supporting things? Why are those, amidst a sea of talky jokes, these things that pop up once in a while? Why don't we make a bunch of these jokes and not rely on verbal humor?''  Rogen and Goldberg have flaunted virtuoso stoner ingenuity when it comes to crafting set pieces -- even the unfairly maligned ''The Green Hornet,'' which they wrote and which Michel Gondry directed, is significantly redeemed by its daffily inspired action sequences alone, like the one in which a car rides an elevator, or the one in which a character shoves another character into a foosball table and ''kicks'' him in the face repeatedly. With ''Escape,'' Rogen said, ''we did add talking eventually, but for a while there was almost none.''  He opened his laptop, where the desktop image was the Wu-Tang logo rendered in rainbow colors so that it resembled the '80s-era Apple logo. Rogen clicked over to a folder marked ESCAPE, revealing hundreds of documents within. Every time he and Goldberg have an idea for a movie, Rogen explained, they start compiling lists of ''ideas for anything: characters, scenes, lines, plot twists, turns -- it could be as general as, like, 'Someone locks themselves in the closet while trying to hide,' or it could be like, 'OK, this character's been this way their whole life. ... '''  Over time, whether they're in the same room or emailing back and forth, as they've done during the pandemic, Rogen and Goldberg sculpt these lists into outlines, then sculpt those outlines into scripts: ''You start to say, 'OK, these 10 things could go together,''' Rogen said. ''Or, 'OK, that's a chunk of a movie,' or, 'If we want all these ideas in the same movie, what's a character that could support that?'''  He scrolled through the folder. ''These are our 'Escape' files -- oh, Jesus -- going back to January 2016,'' he said. He glanced at an early list. ''This totally changed,'' he said, opening another. ''These are gags,'' he explained. Rogen and Goldberg had collected dozens of Keaton-worthy ideas, which he asked me not to reveal. He scrolled to another document, dated February 2019 and titled ''Boarded Action Beats'' -- ''These are gags we started to actually draw,'' he said.  Working with an illustrator, Rogen and Goldberg had completed what was in essence a digital flip book diagraming every scene in ''Escape.'' ''We're literally storyboarding every second of the movie,'' Rogen said. One open-ended, three-word gag I'd seen in a list from May 2019 -- centered delightfully on something you could buy in a hardware store -- had been storyboarded into an elaborate action sequence. Rogen showed it to me frame by frame, narrating as he went. ''She's trying to go from there to there ... these guys are chasing her. ... '' His finger tapped the right arrow. ''She grabs that guy, he's falling, bam, whoop!''  Even in flip-book form, the scene was funny. ''We need to know if these jokes are working, and if the timing is right,'' Rogen said, ''and you can't do a table read and see if people laugh or not, because that would be me saying, like, 'He throws the thing, it bounces off the door, it hits him in the face.''' He laughed. ''We need to be able to see that!''  There's a story Mark Rogen tells about the early days of Seth's career: When the family first moved to L.A., for 'Freaks and Geeks,' Seth signed with a manager and a lawyer, and after some time, ''his lawyer threatened to fire him, because Seth kept getting offered different gigs and saying, 'I'm not doing that, that's not a movie I'd go see and it's not a movie I'd want my friends to see me in.'''  Rogen's self-assurance might be the most enviable thing about him: The fact that, with rare exceptions, he has only ever seemed to work on exactly what he wants to work on. Rogen once recalled his friend Jonah Hill's approaching him for advice after being offered a part in a ''Transformers'' sequel. ''I can see if Steven Spielberg's calling you, asking you to do something, how that's hard to turn down,'' Rogen told an interviewer, recounting the exchange. But in this case, he told Hill: ''You want to make a movie about fightin' robots? Make your own movie about fightin' robots. You can do that. That's on the table now.'' This story has an echo in ''Yearbook,'' in a chapter where Spielberg himself actually invites Rogen and Goldberg to collaborate on a project inspired by the 1984 sci-fi movie ''The Last Starfighter.'' The same idea had already occurred to them, and they decided they'd rather just make their own version. Rogen isn't overly concerned in the book with flattering the powerful. There's also a funny story about George Lucas -- that, within moments of meeting Rogen and Goldberg in 2012, he expressed his certitude that the world would end later that year (Lucas, through a representative, denied this account) -- and an even funnier story about Nicolas Cage pretending to be a white Bahamian for a possible role in ''The Green Hornet,'' bellowing improvised dialogue in a Caribbean patois.  With Point Grey, Rogen can exert that much more control over his career. This has turned out to be good for him not just creatively and financially, but also as a way of weathering industry tumult. Rogen's stock in trade -- the midbudget comedy -- has long been on the endangered-species list in the Marvel era, during which time comedy talent has undergone a mass migration from movies to streaming television. And yet Rogen has largely bucked both of these trends: The Hollywood Reporter recently named Point Grey ''masters of the midbudget comedy,'' crediting its films' success with ''keeping the genre alive.''  Rogen told me, ''In the last few years, we released 'Blockers' and 'Good Boys,' and they both did really well, and they're both 100 percent the exact thing people say doesn't work anymore: $20-million comedies with no huge names that were just funny R-rated comedies -- and they both made a very healthy multiple of their budget.'' Of ''Good Boys,'' he noted, ''That's a script that was around awhile, and no one wanted to make it, because it's about 12-year-olds, and 12-year-olds can't see it. And we say, Everyone's been 12! 'South Park' has been on for 20 years, and they're 9! I watch movies about talking dogs -- I'm not a dog!''  Setting aside the myopia of financial backers, Rogen went on: ''I don't know if other filmmakers are having the conversation that we're always having, which is, Will this work in a movie theater?'' This wasn't, he went on, ''a conversation you used to have to have, but now you do'' -- even more so, post-pandemic -- ''and we're very clear -- we want this to be in a theater, so it has to do things that a movie that works in a theater does. Those movies are different. An audience paying to go out of the house and be surrounded by hundreds of people? That's a very specific product, so you have to be honest with yourself and say, 'Is this ticking the boxes for that product?' I look at other movies and say, 'Did they think this was gonna be in theaters? Did they think this was ticking those boxes?'''  He contrasted ''Good Boys'' with another Point Grey release, ''An American Pickle.'' With the former, Rogen said, ''The concept was super-relatable and believable and easy'' -- three sixth-grade friends ditch school and are waylaid by a series of misadventures en route to a party -- ''and it has set pieces, so it feels like it has a scope to it.'' Whereas, with ''An American Pickle'' -- the first original feature film to stream on HBO Max, in which Rogen stars as both a Brooklynite web designer and his shtetl-hardened great-grandfather, Herschel -- ''we had no illusions: This is not a movie people are gonna necessarily leave their houses for, a quiet character movie with three people in it.''  None of which meant that Rogen was sanguine about the state of the industry. At one point, he told me that his plan was ''hypothetically'' to star in ''Escape'' ''if it gets made one day.'' I expressed surprise at his uncertainty, since the film seemed well into preproduction. ''I'm not convinced we're making a movie until we're two weeks into filming it,'' he said. ''That used to be a thing, where you were told, 'You're greenlit.' That doesn't happen anymore.''  On top of the obvious appeal for Rogen of starting a cannabis company, then, Houseplant has the added benefit of depending in no way on Hollywood for its existence. The week after I visited him at home, I joined Rogen and Goldberg on a video call dedicated to Houseplant business.  ''OK, what are we doing?'' Rogen asked, sitting at his desk in Los Angeles.  ''We're smoking weed!'' Goldberg said in Vancouver.  This was not untrue, though the primary reason for the call was to write copy that would accompany two forthcoming products, something they like to do themselves: a leatherbound carrying case for loose joints and a ''desk lamp with an ashtray built into it, kind of,'' Rogen said, holding up a prototype so I could see.  They agreed that, with the carrying case, ''there should be a joke of some nature,'' as Goldberg put it, but that it could ''start from a more utilitarian place, because it's genuinely solving a problem,'' Rogen added. But no one had been screaming for a combination lamp-ashtray, which meant it had far more comedic potential.  ''I thought we could do an 'And then there was light' joke. ... '' Goldberg said, kicking things off.  Rogen sidestepped this idea and offered another: ''There's also a simple one,'' he said, ''like, 'For years I stared at my desk lamp and my ashtray, sitting beside each other -- two stupidly separate things. ... ''' ''Yeah,'' Goldberg replied, building on the bit. '' 'I kept thinking of the pencil and the eraser, before they were brought together. ... '''  ''Exactly,'' Rogen said. ''What are other disparate things that --''  Goldberg started riffing: '' 'Pepperoni used to not even know pizza! A jukebox, combined with your phone? Absurd!'''  Rogen started writing down these ideas in a shared document, as Goldberg experimented with wording to encapsulate them: '' 'Not everything that should be together, is together. ... ''' Rogen laughed at this and said: ''Yeah! 'Until someone has the audacity to combine them. ... '''  Warming up now, Goldberg got sillier: '' 'The concept of a chair and wheels combined to become the bicycle, which revolutionized the way -- ''' Rogen cracked up so loudly at this that I couldn't hear the rest.  '' 'Buses and missiles combined to become airplanes. ... ''' Goldberg continued.  '' 'Buses and birds ''' Rogen suggested, grinning, and Goldberg's laughter indicated that this revision was a keeper.  For the next 20 minutes, I watched their shared document take form, their names hovering above their cursors, dancing manically around the screen, unfurling jokes. Soon the copy for both the lamp and the case was done, the sun was low in the sky and the frogs at Rogen's place were croaking. It was nearly 5 p.m., which is when he likes to head to his pottery studio -- to clock off for the day and go make some more things.  Prop stylist: Jason Jensen. Stylist: Avo Yermagyan. Groomer: Catherine Furniss. On-set producer: Michael Kachuba/3Star Productions.  Jonah Weiner is a contributing writer based in Oakland, Calif. He writes the style and culture newsletter Blackbird Spyplane. Chris Buck is a photographer based in New York. His latest book is ''Gentlemen's Club: Partners of Exotic Dancers.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS BUCK FOR THE new_york_times) (MM29); The breakthrough: Rogen (far left) with the cast of ''Superbad'' (2007), from left, Jonah Hill, Michael Cera and Evan Goldberg, with whom Rogen started writing the script when they were in eighth grade. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY COLUMBIA PICTURES/EVERETT COLLECTION; SETH ROGEN) (MM30);  (MM31); Rogen in Los Angeles. His casual stoner demeanor belies his productivity. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRIS BUCK FOR THE new_york_times; PROP STYLIST: JASON JENSEN. STYLIST: AVO YERMAGYAN. GROOMER: CATHERINE FURNISS. ON-SET PRODUCER: MICHAEL KACHUBA/3STAR PRODUCTIONS) (MM32-MM33); Rogen's pottery is an online hit. ''I've spent years working on movies that fewer people pay attention to than a vase I spent 40 minutes on,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRIS BUCK FOR THE new_york_times) (MM35)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007k "
141		"    Post-Trump America Sounds Like This  By Emma Dibdin  1,203 words 25 April 2021   3     In the wake of a most untraditional presidency, these shows will keep you up-to-date on what's happening in Washington and our politically polarized country.  A couple of years after Serial sped up podcasting's move into the mainstream, Donald J. Trump's election as president changed the game in a different way. It spawned a plethora of audio shows that promised to help Americans process an unexpected and unsettling time. And though Trump is now out of office, there's still no shortage of political news to try and make sense of: the repercussions of the attack on the Capitol, the continued polarization of the electorate, and the new and ongoing challenges facing his successor, President Biden.  These eight shows will keep you up-to-date on what's happening in Washington, provide context for current events and (maybe) keep you sane along the way.  'Can He Do That?'  This Washington Post show was one of the countless podcasts born in the early days of the Trump presidency, when civilians and political experts were regularly stunned by the audacity of the administration's conduct. As its title suggests, the show's original remit was digging into the legality of the 45th president's actions while in office. But in the four years since its debut, the show has evolved into a broader exploration of the executive branch, and how its powers both shape, and are shaped by, the divided electorate of modern America. Since Trump left office, the host, Allison Michaels, and her guests have tackled specific topics like the latest stimulus bill, while also exploring bigger questions -- for instance, whether gun reform is actually within the president's power, or what responsibilities the president has during a national crisis.  Starter episode: ''The Duty of a President During Crisis''  'U.T.R.' (Not Its Real Name)  If you like your political commentary cynical but not embittered, this relatively new podcast may hit the spot. Beginning in the run-up to the 2020 election, ''Unf*cking the Republic'' delivers audio essays that are consistently compelling and educational, aiming to challenge conventional wisdom and upend the historical narratives that we're taught in school. The host, a ''quasi-anonymous political writer,'' according to the podcast's synopsis, approaches the show with a playful and often coarse tone that never undermines the rigorous, serious content of its episodes. A recent episode, titled ''The American Holocaust,'' offered an unflinching discussion of America's sins against Indigenous nations, or ''the most horrific acts the U.S. has ever perpetrated on a people -- which is saying a lot.'' If the show is sometimes uncomfortable listening, that's the point.  Starter episode: ''Culture Cancel: The American Holocaust''  'Political Gabfest'  A beloved mainstay for many podcast fans, Slate's weekly conversational show is roughly the same age as the format itself, having been going strong since 2005. The hosts, Emily Bazelon, John Dickerson and David Plotz, break down the latest announcements, leaks and scandals from Washington in an approachable style that feels less like a news report and more like eavesdropping on a smart conversation between friends (all of whom happen to be veteran D.C. reporters). The show's format has barely changed over its 16-year run, and that comforting consistency has made it an anchor through especially turbulent times.  Starter episode: ''Midnight Train From Georgia''  'Pantsuit Politics'  It's become common to lament how polarized our political climate has become, and despite President Biden's professed desire for bipartisanship, the divisions seem as deep as ever in 2021. They're so deep that any attempt to reach across the aisle is often derided as either naïve or disingenuous, but the hosts of ''Pantsuit Politics'' are determined to prove that genuine conversations between the left and the right are still possible. Sarah Stewart Holland and Beth Silvers are Kentucky-based friends who hail from opposite ends of the political spectrum, co-wrote a book entitled ''I Think You're Wrong (But I'm Listening),"" and now share down-to-earth conversations on this twice-a-week podcast. Though the hosts' views are often more similar than this premise suggests, it's compelling and thoughtful listening.  Starter episode: ''We're All Strange Combinations of Things''  'The Weeds'  Playfully inverting a well-worn adage (''don't get lost in the weeds''), this Vox staple thrives on delving into the nitty-gritty of policy and the processes through which it's created. Hosted by Matthew Yglesias and Dara Lind, alongside a revolving cast of other Vox staffers, ''The Weeds'' offers a twice-a-week examination of what's happening in the corridors of power. The main feed sometimes includes limited spinoffs, like ''The Next Four Years,'' a three-month primer on the new administration's cabinet appointments and policy plans. More recently, the show has offered detailed but accessible explainers on what the Biden era means for housing, voting rights and immigration policy.  Starter episode: ''It's Time for Class Warfare''  'The Skepticrat'  Though its scathing tone might sound like a product of the Trump years, this salty-mouthed political comedy has actually been running since 2015. Its hosts -- Noah Lugeons, Heath Enwright, and Eli Bosnick -- are perhaps better known for their long-running podcast ''The Scathing Atheist,'' an unapologetically savage and derisive discussion about religion. Here they take a similarly irreverent approach to politics, spotlighting hypocrisy, corruption and incompetence in government while also taking joy in purely ludicrous moments like Rudy Giuliani's melting face.  Starter episode: ''Jewish Space Laser Edition''  'Pod Save America'  Perhaps the podcast that best defines Trump-era resistance podcasting, ''Pod Save America'' is the flagship show of Crooked Media, a left-wing podcast empire founded in 2017 by four former Obama staffers, Jon Favreau, Jon Lovett, Tommy Vietor and Dan Pfeiffer. In twice-weekly episodes, the hosts riff on the latest political news and offer anecdotes and insights from their own time in Washington. Throughout the Trump years, the show was a mix of righteous anger and gallows humor, while also becoming a powerhouse for grass roots activism and fund-raising. The show also features plenty of big-fish guests, like Joe Biden, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Barack Obama, who memorably recorded an interview on the eve of Trump's inauguration.  Starter episode: ''Are We Infrastructure?''  'Left, Right & Center'  Finding a truly centrist political podcast is hard, and this polarization makes it easy for listeners to stay in their echo chambers. Though it's been on the air since 1996, KCRW's ''Left, Right & Center'' is a timely antidote to this dilemma. Each episode of the show spotlights a ''civilized yet provocative'' conversation about current events between liberal and conservative commentators. The host, Josh Barro, affably represents the center, alongside a cast of regular panelists that include senators, policy experts and journalists (recently including The new_york_times's Jamelle Bouie). Depending on the rapport between guests, the show can err on the dry side, but it's a reliable balm in a polarized age.  Starter episode: ''Carrots Over Sticks''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Irene Rinaldi FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007q "
142		"   FEATURE  Deadly Bravado  By Alexis Okeowo  5,215 words 25 April 2021   38     To hear more audio stories from publishers like The new_york_times, download Audm for iPhone or Android .  When Harry Uzoka was 17, he went with his older brother, who was trying to get ahead in modeling, to a meeting at a talent agency in West London, a place of fairy-tale wealth with Edwardian homes and fertile parks. Uzoka grew up in Dagenham, a working-class neighborhood across the city with a growing Nigerian community. He and his brother were raised by a mother who, like other West African immigrants, traded her homeland for London -- cold and indifferent but also possessing free education and more jobs -- so that her children could thrive. Uzoka did well in school, but he had recently served a stint in juvenile detention for robbing a cash-delivery van.  Patrick Egbon-Marshall, an agent who has a reputation for placing Black and mixed-race men in high-profile campaigns for labels like Burberry and Alexander McQueen, remembered Uzoka's almost hiding behind his brother at the meeting in 2010. Uzoka was ''really shy,'' Egbon-Marshall recalled. ''He had lost his way, and this was the only avenue he probably had. He was Black and not the tallest. But he was very charming and able to listen.'' His agency signed Uzoka soon after.  What started for Uzoka as an intriguing lark soon became a way to do something great, even earn his mother's pride. He dreamed of modeling for Gucci one day. ''I want to be a role model for other Black models,'' he told the British men's fashion magazine Boys by Girls in 2011. ''And it would just be iconic to be one of the first Black guys to do that.''  Even with the agency's support, Uzoka had to adjust to the demands of the industry. Modeling was rarely glamorous; it consisted mostly of long periods of boredom and anxiety, interrupted by intense bursts of performance. At casting calls, he would wait in the reception area for as long as an hour, distracting himself by talking with the other models about their outings the previous night. When he was finally taken in to meet the casting director, everything about him was subjected to scrutiny: his physical features, how he moved, his portfolio. He experienced rejection after rejection. (It is not uncommon for models to go to as many as 15 castings in a day and not book one.) Even if he was picked for a show, it meant more waiting -- hours backstage doing hair and makeup and fittings -- all to prepare for a walk that lasted five minutes and paid new faces only a few hundred pounds, a rate significantly less than what female models received. ''Being a male model is so difficult,'' Madeleine Ostlie, a casting director who worked with Uzoka earlier in his career, told me. Owing to the constant demand for fresh faces, she said, ''the life span of a male model is about two years.''  But Uzoka had charisma, and that helped him stand out. ''He had star quality,'' Lulu Kennedy, a veteran talent scout, said. ''He was so attentive and engaged. He would talk to anyone and everyone backstage equally; he gave people his time and his energy.'' Soon he was walking in London Fashion Week and appearing in Nike ads. Mercedes-Benz and Zara followed. Casting directors started to request his presence, and labels booked him for Fashion Week exclusives, at times paying him 10,000 pounds or more to commit to their campaigns. When Uzoka was 21, Paper magazine named him one of England's hottest models.  It was unexpected and overwhelming and otherworldly. Once, Uzoka had admired the clothes; now he saw himself wearing them in magazines and on the sides of buses. His beautiful face, with ears that stuck out, looked down from billboards for Uniqlo, Everlane and Levi's in London, New York and Los Angeles. School friends called to tell him they had seen his image somewhere. ''Everyone in London pretty much knew who he was, and he was just starting to really conquer America,'' Chuck Achike, his close friend and fellow model, would later say in court.  At 25, Harry Uzoka had become one of Britain's most adored male models. And so it later shocked his friends, family and much of the fashion industry that on a clear winter day in 2018, Uzoka was killed by another rising Black male model named George Koh.  The elevation of Uzoka, Koh and other Black male models in British fashion represented a major shift: For years, the industry created few opportunities for Black models, stylists and photographers. Ayishat Akanbi, a stylist who works mainly in men's wear, told me that on her early jobs around 2010, she was often assumed to be a relative of Black clients.  The only prominent Black male model had been Tyson Beckford, who served as the face of Ralph Lauren Polo in the 1990s; it would take two decades for more Black men to approach his level of success. That gap was partly due to the nature of Beckford's fame: His charm and extraordinarily good looks, his popularity with fans and his connection with Polo created a star status that was difficult to replicate. Many Black male models have passed through the industry since, but with varying success. As Bethann Hardison, a former model and now an advocate of diversity in the industry, told me, ''There was erratic interest from designers, who still didn't see Black faces and bodies as fitting their perceptions of high fashion. It was a tiny island.''  But within the past decade, as brands have started trying to appeal to wider markets, many have been eager to cast more diversely. ''The industry has realized, through the Black influence on social media and pop culture, that money can be made from Black people and Black art,'' Philipp Raheem, a photographer who has shot for Kanye West and the designer Virgil Abloh, said. ''Before, they thought Black people weren't their audience and Black models couldn't sell.'' An ascending generation of designers of color, combined with mounting criticism of all-white shows, helped turn the tide. ''It was a perfect storm that allowed another standard of beauty to rise,'' James Scully, a former casting director, told me. ''London is really where it all began, and Harry fell into this world.''  At the same time, Instagram was disrupting the industry in unprecedented ways: Would-be models in the outer districts of London were using it to reach out directly to labels and casting directors, without having to go through agents. Or if they already had agents, hustling models could aggressively promote themselves and draw the attention of new clients. ''Harry was an early adopter of Instagram and naturally good on it,'' Kennedy, the veteran talent scout, told me. ''Beautifully managed, and he'd always thank the brands and give credits -- kind of old-school in the best way.'' Casting directors now routinely scout for unique faces both on the streets of immigrant neighborhoods and on Instagram. ''Casting has exploded, especially street casting, using social media,'' Kennedy told me. ''People are getting themselves out there and getting a ton of followers.''  As the culture evolved, young men like Uzoka seemed to no longer view modeling as incompatible with their masculinity. Succeeding in an industry that valued beauty required male models to show aspects of themselves that could make them uneasy, like their femininity and vulnerability. But making money off your looks became a flex, a skill that could garner fame and access to the same luxuries more conventional celebrities had. And so two at-times-conflicting ideas lay under the hierarchy of male modeling: beauty and the openness it required, and a conception of manliness that still prized dominance and swagger. ''Today being a male model is like being a rock star,'' Egbon-Marshall said. ''It's becoming a thing disadvantaged Black boys think they want to do to get out of council estates,'' he said, referring to British public housing. ''Some of these kids have no passports, they've never done anything, they've all left school. But if they're beautiful, there's a chance they could do this thing.''  Many who met Uzoka thought of him as sensitive and generous. (I began piecing together his life in 2019 from interviews with friends and colleagues, as well as court transcripts.) He didn't need to project machismo. Boys by Girls called him a ''lovely, calm human being.'' He enjoyed talking about African history and love and metaphysics, describing himself as ''a free flying soul, not bound by his physical body.'' During a photo shoot early in his career, Uzoka pulled out his favorite book, Paulo Coelho's ''The Alchemist,'' a novel about following your dreams, and gave it to the photographer to better understand him. He had not yet traveled abroad -- Manchester was the farthest he had gone for vacation -- and he had an evident curiosity, almost innocence, about the world. He loved horror films, was fascinated by crystals and spirituality and hated showing his feet to Leomie Anderson, a fellow model and his girlfriend at the time.  In the community of Black male models, others looked up to Uzoka. There was now more demand for Black men in fashion, but there were still only a small number of them regularly working. ''I really admired models like Harry, and I watched him,'' Leonardo Taiwo, a London-born son of Nigerian immigrants who followed Uzoka into the business, said. ''I wanted to be recognized as much as he was. Everybody respected Harry,'' he told me. ''He was a world-changer.'' During the time Uzoka dated Anderson, Black fans found their relationship inspiring: They embodied a dark-skinned beauty not often found in fashion. ''To the creative Black community, Harry was not only a model,'' the stylist Akanbi told me. ''He was the living representation of possibility.''  George Koh found his way into fashion not long after Uzoka, and he had a remarkably similar background. Born in Liberia, he immigrated to Britain with his family when he was 2. His mother was a retired chef, his father a security officer. As a teenager, Koh also got caught up with law enforcement: He was arrested for drug possession and assaulting two police officers. After high school, he studied business economics at college and completed an internship at a media agency, but he didn't know what he wanted to do.  While Koh was still a university student, a talent scout approached him on the street. At first, modeling seemed like a way to make money and try something new. ''I thought maybe I could do some traveling,'' he later said in court. Dean Cleary-Patterson was the first agent to sign Koh, to his agency d1, in November 2013. ''He was one of our top guys,'' Cleary-Patterson said of how sought-after Koh became.  Koh quickly began booking jobs with labels like Kenzo and Louis Vuitton, and he liked to show off his success. According to court transcripts, Koh texted a woman a photo of his check at a fancy restaurant to impress her: The meal cost 100 pounds. ''George was immature, because of how successful he was and how naïve he was,'' Taiwo, who was friends with Koh, told me. ''He had a lot of growing up to do.''  But Koh found the work itself alienating. It was not rare to be the sole Black man on a shoot or the only one in a show of more than two dozen men. Backstage, there were no stylists who could do his hair or who knew how he and his friends liked to dress. No one who could relate to where he came from and how he grew up. ''I was the only one, or maybe there's another person, so it kind of felt like a novelty,'' Koh told me.  Even though the industry was recruiting Black models, it could treat them as interchangeable commodities: The young men routinely found themselves competing with one another for the same limited number of bookings. Every time Koh showed up for a casting call, it seemed, Uzoka was there. ''We bumped into each other a lot,'' Koh told me. ''Some stylists were mistaking me for him.''  A former model, who requested anonymity to speak about Koh, said, ''George seemed quite nice, quite chill.'' She met him and Uzoka at the same casting in 2015. She remembered that Koh and Uzoka often went for the same jobs. ''The industry is partly to blame,'' she said. ''They were put in the same box. If one person is getting confirmed and the other isn't, it does eventually become a thing. I'm sure that George felt that pressure build up.''  As Uzoka's fame grew, it seemed to have an effect on Koh's sense of self. ''The whole thing with George and Harry was that whole comparison thing, constantly,'' Martin Addo, a streetwear designer who was also friends with Koh, said. ''It wasn't, 'Let Harry be Harry Uzoka. Let George be George Koh.''' He added, ''I remember him saying stuff like, 'When it comes to certain castings, they either pick between me or Harry.''' At an Adidas shoot in Germany, Koh told me, the photographer said that he looked quite similar to Uzoka, who was ''one of their boys.''  Koh told me that Uzoka tried to be a mentor to him. They met in 2014, at a show for the clothing line Agi & Sam. For once, most of the models were Black, and Uzoka gave the inexperienced guys, including Koh, tips on walking. They saw each other again at shoots in London and Paris. At a shoot for Urban Outfitters, Uzoka looked through Koh's portfolio and suggested that he move to a better agency; he later advised Koh to bulk up to get more jobs. In the small world of Black British models, their lives circled each other's without ever quite colliding.  It is not hard to see how the models who existed on the periphery of Uzoka's orbit could long for a closeness to it. In a desert of colleagues and clients who had no relationship to Black culture, Uzoka's crew of model friends was an oasis of warmth and a space where a Black man could be himself and talk and act freely without being judged. Jamel Gordon-Lynch got into modeling with the help of his mother after a high school friend's father suggested he try it; an agency signed him when he was 20. He saw the work as an adventure and began hanging out with Uzoka, whom he described as a ''bundle of light,'' and other young Black models. The group decided to create a collective called Justanorm, a reference to how they were just ''normal'' guys who had found themselves in a new and surreal reality. The group met up to talk about ideas over jerk chicken; they wanted to rap and produce music and create a YouTube channel together.  The collective was eventually made up of Uzoka, Gordon-Lynch, Achike and the models Jeremy Boateng, Boyd Alves and Dylan Williams. Represented by London's top agencies, each man had a striking look, from Uzoka's boyish features and protruding ears to Achike's blue eyes and fair skin. They were all consumed with streetwear and hip-hop. Boys by Girls shot the group for multiple issues, following them to their favorite hangouts, like a 24-hour bagel shop in Brick Lane. The men treated one another like brothers, the magazine observed, and seemed like ''a secret society'' of which everyone wanted to be a part. Uzoka joked that the models had ''come together for global takeover.''  ''We met through modeling, but now we are literally with each other every day,'' he told the magazine in 2014. ''It's not just about modeling now; it's about being there for each other every step of the way.'' He went on, ''It just feels like we are all chasing that one dream, and we all inspire each other to do it at the same time.''  On a typical morning, Uzoka and his friends would head off to castings, where they usually ran into one another. Later, over lunch, they would relax and catch up, talking about jobs they had booked and looking through one another's portfolios, before heading off to more castings in the afternoon. At the end of the day, they would go out partying. They sometimes traveled together for work. They joked that they felt ''like aliens'' when they walked around European countries like Italy, where casting agents would tell them there was no market for Black models. As a group, they felt invincible.  Justanorm was the platonic ideal of how rival models could create and monetize mutual support in a callous profession. ''If any of us booked something, we felt like we all booked it,'' Gordon-Lynch said. ''We got so much love for it, especially from young Black people in London.'' He added, ''I feel like we opened a lot of doors.'' The collective kept up a Tumblr that documented each model's appearances in ad campaigns and runway shows, and clients began hiring them to work together. Men's Health shot the men on horseback for a feature. ''We were basically riding horses through the hood,'' Gordon-Lynch recalled. ''It was good stuff.'' Taiwo saw them around a lot: ''Whenever they came in the casting room, you just felt their huge presence,'' he said.  The men's level of agency and their camaraderie -- in an industry that has always been intensely competitive, rife with subtle slights -- was made possible, in great part, by social media. Besides allowing young models to contact labels themselves, it lets the labels skip casting agencies and hire those models directly (often at cut rates). The level of access on all sides is without precedent: fashion democratized. Egbon-Marshall, the agent, said he encouraged boys he couldn't sign to get on Instagram and ''create their own brands.'' Abdourahman Njie, a Swedish-Gambian artist and model, was scouted on the service and hired to pose in a Botter ad a few years ago; after the makeup artist who worked on the shoot posted the photo on her Instagram account, an agency immediately contacted and signed Njie. Soon after, he was hired for a Burberry campaign.  But social media also allowed petty grievances to escalate into something darker. Relegated to orbiting the men of Justanorm, Koh seemed to grow increasingly fixated on gaining the attention and approval of Uzoka. He began keeping tabs on Uzoka's friends and family on Instagram, repeatedly trying to follow their private accounts. (In court, Koh said that an app he was using to gain followers on Instagram was responsible.) When they complained to Uzoka, he asked Koh to stop. ''There is an entitlement that people think they have access to you,'' Akanbi, the stylist, said. ''Maybe he could feel like he knew Harry better than he did.''  Instead of stopping, Koh continued to insinuate himself into Uzoka's network. About a week before the fight that led to Uzoka's death, he invited Annecetta Lafon, a model who was visiting from Paris, to hang out. Lafon was part of the intersecting circles of Black models living in Europe. She had first connected with Uzoka, whom she befriended over Instagram. Not long after he followed her, Koh did the same.  Lafon took up Koh on his invitation, she said in court. Though she had never met him in person, they were each part of what felt like an intimate bubble. But after she arrived at his flat, Koh repeatedly asked her if she knew Uzoka, she testified, and claimed he slept with Uzoka's girlfriend, the model Ruby Campbell. (Campbell later wrote on Instagram that she didn't even know Koh. ''I have NEVER met George and Harry was NEVER friends with him,'' she said. ''The whole thing seemed creepy.'') Lafon grew uncomfortable with Koh's childish posturing.  She spent the next week at Uzoka's place, where she told him what Koh had said. In response, she later testified, Uzoka just laughed. ''He was not surprised,'' she recalled. He showed Lafon multiple texts he had sent Koh, accusing the other model of spreading lies and rumors about him. To Uzoka, Koh's animosity was beginning to feel almost routine, an unavoidable burden of his fame.  But the more Uzoka thought about what Koh said about his girlfriend, the angrier he grew. ''Harry's mood didn't feel right,'' one of his roommates, Seun Lawal, testified. ''He just didn't like what was being said.'' The next day, Uzoka and Koh argued on a phone call broadcast on speaker for Uzoka's friends to hear. Koh called Lafon a liar and denied saying anything about Campbell. When Uzoka asked how Koh even knew whom he was dating, Koh said he had figured it out on Instagram -- more or less admitting that he was stalking Uzoka on social media. ''George, just leave it,'' Uzoka said as the call ended. ''Why make this trouble?''  The phone call seemed to settle the matter. After Uzoka hung up, Achike recalled, he was smiling. ''He squashed it. He was acting as if George had said sorry and it was over. Like it was nothing to worry about.'' They started playing video games.  But Koh later said he was ''still worried'' about the situation, nervous that he would run into Uzoka at a photo shoot or a party. He apologized to Uzoka over text. But he added that he was ready to fight, if need be -- a performance of male bravado he seemed unable to drop. His friend Taiwo said he told Koh to go home and relax.  ''The kind of person George is, he worries a lot,'' Jonathan Okigbo, a childhood friend, told the court. ''George sometimes has a tendency to overthink things.''  Koh called Uzoka a few times, but he didn't answer. Two days after their phone conversation, Koh texted Uzoka. ''Where you,'' he wrote. ''I'll come there we can fight, bring your friends with you.''  Koh persuaded Okigbo and another longtime friend, Merse Dikanda, to accompany him. The men reluctantly agreed, they later said in court, believing that Koh was putting on a dangerous front. ''Why you say you're going to go fight him, when you know you're not a fighter?'' Dikanda recalled asking. ''You're just going to go there and have some talk. I don't know why you're trying to exaggerate yourself.''  ''I know, I know,'' Koh said, according to Dikanda's recollection. ''I just want to meet him. He's ignoring my calls.''  ''Come Shepherd's Bush,'' Uzoka responded over text, referring to the neighborhood where he lived. Within minutes, Koh showed up near Uzoka's flat, holding a knife in each hand. Dikanda carried a machete.  Uzoka and his roommate, Adrian Harper, took apart a set of dumbbells in their living room, Harper later testified. Armed with the metal bars, they went into the street. Across a parking lot, they saw Koh and his friends walking away. ''Yo, George!'' Uzoka called out. The men turned around, and the groups approached each other.  While Okigbo chased Harper back to the flat, Koh and Dikanda cornered Uzoka between two cars, his back against a fence. A neighbor who passed them at that moment later testified that Uzoka ''was standing like he might have been a little scared.'' He swung the metal bar he had brought with him, but Koh stabbed Uzoka three times, piercing his heart. Uzoka somehow managed to sprint back to his flat, bleeding the entire way. His roommate, Harper, ran to his side.  ''I've been stabbed!'' he testified Uzoka told him.  ''Where?'' Harper asked.  Uzoka didn't reply. He collapsed at the entrance to his apartment, hitting his head on the wall as he fell. Emergency responders tried to revive him, but he died of his wounds that night.  That evening, unaware that Uzoka had died, Koh called a friend in a daze and confessed that he had stabbed someone. They prayed together over the phone, asking God to help Koh make better choices. Three days later, Koh turned himself in and was charged with murder and possession of an offensive weapon.  In court, Koh testified that he ''didn't mean to kill Harry.'' Crying on the witness stand, he recalled how Uzoka taught him how to walk the runway, gave him advice and inspired him. He claimed he was in ''genuine fear'' for his life and had acted in self-defense. ''I didn't mean to stab him,'' he repeated, mantra-like, wavering between an admission of what he did and a reluctance to accept it. ''I apologized even though I didn't do anything. I am so sorry that he's dead.''  Before Koh was sentenced, a statement from Uzoka's mother was read in court. She had kept a low profile during the trial, avoiding the media. In only a few short years, her son had made good on her dream: As he grew more successful, he helped pay her mortgage and took her on vacations abroad. He had even begun to build a home for her back in Nigeria.  ''I have so much pain for the death of my Harry, and I find it difficult these days to go on without him,'' his mother wrote, according to The Mirror. ''His departure has left a gaping hole, a gap, a void in the family that we are all finding hard to contend with. He was due to start acting in a couple of upcoming movies, but that chance has been taken away from him. My son was a beautiful boy. I would give anything to change places with Harry, to take away the horror and pain that he suffered that day.''  To those who knew Uzoka and Koh, each man appeared to have let ideas of masculinity and honor distort his judgment. ''It was about male pride, it's ego,'' Taiwo said. ''When you feel disrespected, peer pressure can make it harder to let it go.'' Koh offered a similar explanation in court, when he was asked what he meant when he texted Uzoka that he was ready to fight. ''To be honest, I didn't mean the word 'fight,''' he told the court. ''It was just bravado. What I meant -- what I was trying to do was just find a situation where I could meet Harry and just speak to him like face to face.'' On Sept. 21, 2018, Koh was sentenced to life in prison for murder. His friend Dikanda, who carried the machete, was also convicted of murder, while Okigbo was found guilty of manslaughter.  After the murder, models and stylists and fashion photographers fell into months of grief and anger and introspection, trying to make sense of what happened. Some Black models worry that the current push for greater diversity will prove as fleeting as everything else in fashion, plunging them back into more ruthless competition. The landscape is larger and more inclusive than it was when Uzoka and Koh began working in the industry a decade ago, but Egbon-Marshall, who scouted the first Black male model to walk for Burberry in 2014, thinks that the fixation on race is ''overkill'' -- overcompensating in a way that will burn out quickly. (When I left our meeting in East London, I passed a bus stop covered with a Polo ad featuring only Black models.)  Five years ago in men's fashion, white models with pale, androgynous looks had the most currency. Now Black men in the industry are already starting to wonder how much freedom they will have in their careers if the interest in diversity fades. ''It gets to you, and you can start to question yourself,'' Njie, the Swedish-Gambian model, said. ''Because especially if you're Black, you're at the whims of the industry.'' The men of Justanorm, meanwhile, want to believe that the alliances Uzoka fostered can triumph over rivalry. ''All of us have always inspired each other to do other things, or be the best people we can be, or the best models at least.'' Gordon-Lynch said. ''I think we've just tried to carry that on to a higher level.''  That camaraderie has expanded past Justanorm; Black male models don't have to be part of it to have that feeling. ''Today, instead of having one Black model in the Topman show, maybe they would have four or five,'' Cleary, Koh's first agent, said. ''Thankfully there is a lot more diversity in casting directors, people who are calling the shots: the art directors, the designers.'' Cleary also works more now on helping his models better manage their expectations and take rejections less personally. In fact, Uzoka's legacy in the industry could be the increased alliances among male models in London, especially Black ones, in the wake of his death. Had Koh's career begun even five years later, he might have had an easier time moving through the world of modeling.  The young, successful model Babacar N'doye, who recently shot a Dior Men campaign, told me that while there was occasional competition among him and his Black peers, they all knew and supported one another. ''It's just camaraderie. When I see the guys doing their thing, it's love -- because as long as it's one of us, it doesn't really matter,'' N'doye, who was born to Senegalese parents and grew up in East London, said, smiling more broadly than at any other point during our conversation. N'doye didn't know Uzoka, but he said he had ''nothing but respect'' for his work and life.  From prison, Koh still sounded bewildered by what he had done. ''I kind of thought, OK, let me just show Harry that I'm a big man -- and that's how it escalated.'' Earlier, he asked me if I had heard of the concept of bravado; he was trying to come to terms with his regrets. ''It's my fault,'' he said. ''I had the knife that day, and if I didn't have a knife that day, he'd be alive.''  Source photographs: Harry Uzoka (top illustration): Matt Stansfield. Ollgar Close: Jonathan Brady/PA Images, via Getty Images.  Alexis Okeowo is a staff writer at The New Yorker and a contributing editor at Vogue who lives in Los Angeles and was named Journalist of the Year in 2020 by the Newswomen's Club of New York. Aaron Marin is an artist who works with mixed media and collage and works under the name NEUTOKYO, a nod to his formative years spent living in Japan. His work focuses on assumptions of beauty, power and intelligence as they relate to the Black experience in America.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AARON MARIN; OLLGAR CLOSE: JONATHAN BRADY/PA IMAGES, VIA GETTY IMAGES; HARRY UZOKA; MATT STANSFIELD.) (MM38; MM39)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007i "
143		"   READER COMMENTS His War on the War on Drugs  840 words 25 April 2021   3     His War on the War on Drugs  Readers responded by letter to the April 11 article by John Leland about the Columbia professor Carl L. Hart, who says the harmful effects of drugs have been overstated. Comments have been edited.  As a recovering addict and treatment provider for young adults, I am compelled to call out Dr. Hart's message that ''most'' Americans who use an illegal drug have an ''overwhelmingly positive experience'' as dangerous. I fear that many will die because they will seek to follow in the footsteps of an admired and inspirational university educator and role model. While I agree with his position against the criminalization of drug use and the impact the systematically racist war on drugs has had on communities of color, what this article posits is not a solution to that problem. Instead, it glorifies false hope and severely downplays the very real and devastating disease of addiction. Drug overdose alone has claimed more than 760,000 lives since 1999. These deaths represent mothers, fathers, sons, daughters and students.  With a platform as far-reaching as his, and with his young adult students listening and watching closely, Dr. Hart has a responsibility to provide a full-picture view of addiction and its impacts, including the tremendous suffering it causes individuals and communities. In this article, he has failed to do just that.  Dr. Amanda Fialk, New York  The writer is chief of clinical services at the Dorm, a treatment community for young adults with locations in New York and Washington.  I admire the courage that Dr. Hart has taken in looking at the truth behind drug use, and the stigmas that are wrongfully attached to drugs of dependency. The culture in our country is shaped by old beliefs and taboos of the lack of moral fiber and will power in seek of abstinence from a dependency. It is easy to make quick assertions of individuals who are addicted to a substance and dismiss them as weak, broken or out of control. This is the reason that 90 percent of drug rehabilitation is a failure: 1. Stigma/shame 2. Failure to rehabilitate the true cause of addiction (financial, social, psychological, interpersonal hopelessness). 3. The war on drugs.  James Gedmin, Orland Park, Ill.  Dr. Hart has many insightful perspectives on the terrible racial injustice indicative of the political war on drugs, which has in fact become a war on people of color. He clearly articulates how drug policies have been used so bigotedly to depict people of color as violent or immoral. The important ways he challenges social and legal inequities become obscured, however, by the misleading description of these drugs as benign substances with primary benefit versus harm. He glibly dismisses the differences between caffeine, cannabis and heroin as if a stick, a gun and plutonium are all simply weapons. More than 81,000 drug overdose deaths occurred in the United States in the 12 months ending in May 2020. While there are some valid points to make about the fact that 70 percent of people who use substances do not develop addiction, the author could have made those points without downplaying the very real risks of substance use to the tens of millions who are most vulnerable to addiction, stigmatizing them as ignorant or irresponsible.  Christopher Yadron, Rancho Mirage, Calif.  The writer is administrator of the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage.  It is inaccurate for Dr. Hart to dismiss as ''self-serving'' the distinction between less dangerous drugs and drugs like heroin and methamphetamine. No one has ever died directly from marijuana use. On the contrary, 50,000 Americans died from opioid-involved overdoses in 2019, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. And anyone who ever has looked at easily accessible data concerning the devastating effects of heavy meth use would never make the intellectually embarrassing claim that there is no real distinction, in terms of damage, between methamphetamine and marijuana.  Martin Swiadon, Richmond, Calif.  A glance through the many misinformed, demeaning, condescending, angry and often borderline threatening comments with this article's online version goes a long way toward explaining why a vast majority of reasonable recreational hard-drug users -- who own property, run businesses, keep appointments and maintain healthy relationships -- prefer to remain in the closet regarding the pastime, which is a shame, because that same secrecy allows the out-of-control drug users to elude help. But if everyone behaved as rationally as they imagine themselves to behave, none of us would begrudge Uncle Frank the occasional bender around the holidays when he dresses up as Santa for the kids, and this openness would also make it easier to get Uncle Crowbar the help he needs before he lands all his kids in the hospital. Our current norm of forcing drug use into the dark shadows helps no one.  Daniel Merchán, Evanston, Ill.  Carl L. Hart is a neuroscientist. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SIMBARASHE CHA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007p "
144		"   STUDIES SHOW  The pandemic has changed drinking patterns, especially among women. The impacts probably won't be fully known for years.  By Kim Tingley  1,442 words 25 April 2021   14     The past year has changed alcohol use patterns, especially among women. The impacts probably won't be fully known for years.  Even before the pandemic began, some Americans were drinking significantly more alcohol than they had in decades past -- with damaging consequences. In 2020, researchers at the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (N.I.A.A.A.) found that from 1999 through 2017, per capita consumption increased by 8 percent and the number of alcohol-related deaths doubled, many caused by liver disease. The trends are particularly concerning for women: Whereas the number of men who reported any drinking stayed mostly the same, the proportion of women who did so increased 10 percent, and the number of women who reported binge drinking, or consuming roughly four or more drinks in about two hours, increased by 23 percent. (For men, binge drinking is about five or more drinks in that period.) Current dietary guidelines consider moderate drinking to be at most one drink a day for women and two for men.  So researchers were understandably apprehensive when, early in the pandemic, alcohol sales spiked. They were especially concerned about women, because similar quantities of alcohol affect them more adversely than men, making them more likely to suffer injuries from accidents and to develop chronic illnesses like liver and heart disease and cancer. But it was unclear whether increased sales would translate into increased consumption. Perhaps Americans were hoarding alcohol as they were toilet paper.  A growing body of research, however, has begun to confirm that Americans, and women in particular, are indeed drinking more in response to the pandemic. In December, researchers from Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, published the results of a survey they conducted last May in The International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. They found that of the more than 800 respondents -- those who replied to the online questionnaire were mostly white women -- 60 percent were drinking more compared with before Covid-19 (13 percent were drinking less). More than 45 percent of participants said their reasons for drinking included increased stress. And those who reported feeling ''very much'' or ''extreme'' stress from the pandemic reported drinking more on more days than those who were less affected. Another survey conducted this February by the American Psychological Association found that nearly one in four adults reported drinking more to manage pandemic stress. Though stress has long been a common reason people turn to alcohol, the extent to which it appeared to cause increased consumption during the past year was startling, says George Koob, director of the N.I.A.A.A. ''It shouldn't have been a surprise, but it did surprise us, this drinking to cope.''  That trend is especially alarming because previous research suggests that people who drink to cope -- as opposed to doing so for pleasure -- have a higher risk of developing an alcohol-use disorder, which is the inability to stop or control drinking even when it causes harm. Alcohol can be calming in the short term: It slows activity in the amygdala, the area of the brain that readies the body's ''fight or flight'' response to real or imagined stress by increasing heart rate and blood pressure and amplifying our awareness of threatening stimuli. But over time, alcohol's dampening effect on the amygdala decreases, while the region itself becomes ''hyperactive in between bouts of drinking,'' according to Aaron White, a senior scientific adviser at the N.I.A.A.A. Achieving the same level of relief requires drinking more, and more often.  There are already indications that groups feeling the most pandemic-related stress are seeing greater increases in alcohol consumption. A survey of 12,000 physicians, for instance, found that more than 40 percent were experiencing burnout, very likely amplified by the pandemic, and of those, more than a quarter were drinking to deal with it. And though pre-pandemic research showed that parents were less likely than people without children to engage in risky levels of alcohol consumption, parents appear to be among those drinking more now -- especially if their children are engaged in remote schooling.  The most worrisome drinking behavior, as before the pandemic, appears to be among women, who have also borne more of the child-care burden created by school closures. A study published in October in The Journal of Addiction Medicine found that between February and April 2020, women had a greater increase in excessive drinking than men did. Respondents who are Black reported greater increases, too. A November study in the journal Addictive Behaviors, based on an April survey that asked about people's drinking during the previous month, found that women drank more than men in response to pandemic stress, to the point that their intake levels were roughly equal. ''I left that study with more questions than answers,'' says Lindsey Rodriguez, the paper's lead author and a psychologist at the University of South Florida. ''Is it because of home-schooling? Uncertainty about the future? High pressure in more domains of life? Women were disproportionately affected by all things Covid-19. This is another way of showing the effects of that.''  Previous disasters, including the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the 2003 SARS outbreak and Hurricane Katrina, have been followed by increases in alcohol abuse among those who experienced them and their aftermath. But researchers have never studied the impact on drinking behavior of a catastrophe that lasted as long and was as pervasive as the current pandemic. Nor did those earlier events increase social isolation while also initiating widespread changes in the availability of alcohol through takeout and delivery, as Covid-19 has. There has been more drinking at home, which is associated with domestic violence and child neglect, Carolina Barbosa, a behavioral health scientist at RTI International, a nonprofit research organization, points out. ''So it's not just the health of the person who is drinking that we are concerned with,'' says Barbosa, the lead author of the Addiction Medicine study, ''but it's also the social impact on the family and society in general.''  Those potential repercussions -- on everything from individual health to poverty, crime and violence, which have previously been associated with the density of alcohol sellers in a given area -- will take time to unfold and assess. Right now, most of the data available on people's changes in drinking behavior are limited to small surveys. ''This all suggests people are starting to put in place patterns of heavier drinking,'' says Elyse Grossman, a policy fellow at Johns Hopkins and lead author of the International Journal article. She expects to start seeing the effects one to three years from now, which is when alcohol abuse increased following other catastrophes. (Already cases of alcoholic liver disease are up an estimated 30 percent over the past year in the University of Michigan's health system, and many of those additional patients were young women.)  Yet despite the worrying circumstances, at least 20 states are considering making permanent the relaxed alcohol rules they put in place during the pandemic. And alcohol manufacturers have exploited Covid-19 as a marketing tool to an extent that is ''frustrating and surprising,'' Grossman says. ''They have used the pandemic to increase sales and oppose regulation. 'You need time to yourself; you should be drinking. You need alcohol to relax; you need it to get through this pandemic.''' She adds: ''It's not an ordinary product, like coffee or pencils. It's the third-leading cause of preventable death in the U.S.''  On a population level, this past year's drinking has already set in motion a cascade of consequences that would be difficult to reverse absent major policy changes. But individuals can take steps to avoid negative outcomes themselves. Koob says that the emergence of telehealth during the pandemic may be a ''silver lining'' that will allow physicians and support groups to reach more struggling people. Treatments exist on ''a spectrum,'' he notes. ''Not everyone has to go into a 28-day detox.'' Doctors and health officials should begin responding now, with initiatives like screening for people's drinking patterns and ''better messaging'' on what is excessive drinking, Barbosa says. ''There are more people who are going to need help.''  Kim Tingley is a contributing writer for the magazine.  Kim Tingley is a contributing writer for the magazine.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Ori Toor FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007m "
145		"   TIP  How to Imagine an Unfamiliar Place  By Malia Wollan  413 words 25 April 2021   21     Don't focus on what feels foreign. Instead, look for commonalities with a familiar analogue.  ''Spend time daydreaming about what a place will look and feel like,'' says Aaron Yazzie, 35, a mechanical engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. He designed the drill bits on the Perseverance Rover that will soon begin auguring into Mars to collect rock cores. Yazzie has obviously never been to Mars, but he spends a lot of time imagining it and designing tools that will function on its cold, dusty surface.  To envision a location, it helps to identify known analogues. Yazzie, who is Navajo, grew up playing with his cousins on the rust-colored deserts of the Navajo Nation. When he started working on Mars missions a decade ago, he felt an immediate familiarity with the red planet. ''It looks exactly like Northern Arizona,'' he says. When stumped with a Mars engineering question, Yazzie starts by picturing himself standing on the mesas of his youth. To test his hardware on Earth, he and his team go out and find rock types akin to what they'll encounter on Mars.  Don't focus on what makes a thing foreign. Instead, find points of commonality. To do that, start by finding out as much as you can about the place in question: its geology, history, weather patterns and origin story. Billions of years ago when the solar system formed, scientists believe that Mars and Earth were similar: watery, terrestrial planets with atmospheres. ''They have sand dunes just like we have sand dunes, they have Mars quakes just like we have earthquakes,'' Yazzie says.  The ability to dream up detailed worlds will serve you in all kinds of contexts, whether you're preparing to scuba-dive in the deep sea while practicing in a shallow pool; planning a trip to a place you've never been; or designing a building on an empty plot of land. The skill can also help you imagine yourself in less familiar roles. Yazzie does outreach about careers in science, engineering and technology to Indigenous youth because he knows that just seeing a person who looks like you, or who grew up in a similar place, can help you chart a path toward a life that might otherwise feel unattainable. ''Don't exclude yourself from giant dreams,'' he says.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Radio FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007n "
146		"   SCREENLAND  Throw Down  By Jody Rosen  1,287 words 25 April 2021   7     A musical battle, the hit webcast suggests, is really just a pretext for a party and an occasion to appreciate something.  Steve Harvey, the comedian and game-show host, is not prone to understatement, least of all when it comes to bespoke men's wear. This past Easter Sunday, he appeared on a studio stage wearing a custom satin suit in a violet hue previously unknown to science. Harvey was there to host an episode of the popular webcast Verzuz, a musical competition in which famous artists face off to determine who has the better catalog. The episode was a big one, a showdown of soul legends pitting the Isley Brothers against Earth, Wind & Fire, and Harvey's words were as loud as his suit: This would be, he announced, ''the most epic Verzuz of all time.''  Onstage, Ron and Ernie Isley sat facing their counterparts, Earth, Wind & Fire's Philip Bailey, Verdine White and Ralph Johnson. It was indeed an unusual matchup. Verzuz battles typically feature artists -- rappers, R&B singers, influential producers -- who have made their name in the past few decades. But Earth, Wind & Fire's debut album arrived in stores 50 years ago; the Isley Brothers' first hit, ''Shout,'' was released in 1959, when Steve Harvey was a toddler. Now 64, he faced the camera to address younger music fans. ''Ask your mama about this here music,'' he said. ''If you don't know their music, it's 'cause you don't know nothing about music. So sit down and learn.''  Pop music has always gone hand in hand with strong opinions and heated debates -- including the kinds of generational cleavages that inspire finger-wagging lectures. There are times when fans stake personal identities on their favorite records or genres, or sustain fierce debates over rival artists: Beatles or Stones, Michael Jackson or Prince, Nicki or Cardi. Arguing about music may well be as primal a human endeavor as making it. Verzuz is based on this principle. The title evokes a heavyweight bout, and the episodes unfold like a boxing match: Each round presents a track from each artist, with viewers encouraged to pick the victor on a song-by-song basis.  The format has links to feisty musical blood sports: jazz's cutting contests, Jamaican sound clashes, rap battles. But Verzuz has emerged as the warmest and fuzziest musical phenomenon of the past year, one of the internet's most reliable suppliers of good vibes. Verzuz began on Instagram Live during the early weeks of the pandemic, with a battle between its co-founders, the hip-hop producers Timbaland and Swizz Beatz. That first webcast, which stretched for five hours, was a novelty: an odd combination of a Zoom conference call, a D.J. set and a languid late-night hang. Timbaland played one of his hits (Aaliyah's ''One in a Million''), Swizz Beatz answered with one of his (DMX's ''Ruff Ryders' Anthem''). The scrolling comments filled with emojis and exclamations (''Timbo range too much for swizz''). The interface was wonky and the sound muddy, but the spectacle -- musicians glimpsed through laptop cameras, grooving to their own records -- was strange and thrilling, a more intimate encounter than showbiz normally permits. In a world that had ground to a halt, the two producers had hit upon a whole new way to stage a concert.  A year later, Verzuz is somewhat spiffed up. It was recently acquired by TrillerNet, the parent company to a TikTok competitor, and has a sponsorship deal with Cîroc vodka and a partnership with Peloton. Competitors no longer stream in from remote locations on jittery Wi-Fi. But the show retains a gonzo charm, and a sense that unscripted weirdness may erupt at any moment. A battle between the dance-hall titans Beenie Man and Bounty Killer, livestreamed from Jamaica, was interrupted by the local police. (''There are 500,000 people watching us right now from all over the world,'' Beenie Man told them. ''Do you want to be that guy?'') The R&B star Ashanti was forced to stall when her adversary, Keyshia Cole, ran an hour late. The Wu-Tang Clan rappers Ghostface Killah and Raekwon finished off their battle singing and dancing to old disco hits.  This shagginess extends to the competition itself. There's no formal means of determining a Verzuz winner; victory is in the ear of the beholder. Viewers weigh in on social media, and journalists write recaps. But their judgments are, of course, subjective, maybe even beside the point. A musical battle, Verzuz suggests, is really a pretext for a party and an occasion for art appreciation. This has always been true: From the primeval pop hothouse of Tin Pan Alley, where songwriters vied to churn out hits, to today's pop charts, dominated by hip-hop producers chasing novel sounds, one-upsmanship is often the motor of innovation, an engine of both musical art and commerce. Great songs, beloved albums, groundbreaking styles -- all have resulted from musicians' drive to outshine their colleagues.  Competition is also a driving force in music fandom -- for better or, often these days, for worse. Today, pop fandom marinates in online swamps similar to those that breed conspiracy theories and political extremism, with almost comically toxic results: Some super fans organize themselves into ''armies'' that devote disturbing amounts of energy to the coordinated harassment of anyone seen as speaking ill of their favorite stars.  One of the subtler values of Verzuz is that it models a saner, more joyful, more pleasurable kind of musical advocacy and competition -- in which trash is talked lovingly, both doled out and received in good humor. Here, too, there are politics of a different kind. Last summer, in the aftermath of the killing of George Floyd, Verzuz held two ''special editions'': a gospel episode titled ''The Healing,'' featuring the singers Kirk Franklin and Fred Hammond, and a Juneteenth celebration, with Alicia Keys and John Legend. Nearly every artist to appear on Verzuz is Black, and the show makes no concessions to any other audience; non-Black viewers enter its virtual spaces as eavesdroppers on an in-group conversation. The point of these battles is not to choose winners, but to luxuriate in the glories of the Black pop canon, and the community forged by that body of music. The critic Craig Jenkins, writing about a matchup between Gladys Knight and Patti LaBelle, rendered a pithy verdict that could be applied to the whole Verzuz enterprise: ''Blackness won.''  That was true again on Easter Sunday. Despite Steve Harvey's best efforts to stir up intergenerational beef, the webcast was a showcase of musical continuity across the decades. (In the unlikely event that there were viewers unfamiliar with Earth, Wind & Fire or the Isleys, they would surely have recognized many of the songs, which have been copiously sampled and interpolated by hip-hop artists.) The episode ended in the only way it could have: with members of both groups gathered at the front of the stage, dancing and singing along to Earth, Wind & Fire's celestial anthem ''September,'' abandoning all pretense that they were adversaries in musical battle. ''Celebrate! Love!'' shouted Philip Bailey. ''Enjoy! Appreciate!''  Source photographs by Raymond Boyd/Getty Images; Ebet Roberts/Redferns/Getty Images; Michael Putland/Getty Images.  Jody Rosen is a contributing writer for the magazine and the author of ''Two Wheels Good: The Bicycle on Planet Earth and Elsewhere,'' to be published next year. He last wrote about the musical prodigy Jacob Collier.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY SCREEN GRAB FROM YOUTUBE.) (MM7);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE MCQUADE) (MM8);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAYMOND BOYD/GETTY IMAGES; EBET ROBERTS/REDFERNS/GETTY IMAGES; MICHAEL PUTLAND/GETTY) (MM9)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007l "
147		"    Poem: Concerto No. 2 in G Minor, Op. 8, RV 315 'L'estate': I. Allegro mà non molto  By francine j. harris and Reginald Dwayne Betts  546 words 25 April 2021   10     The first five times I read this poem, I never imagined that the title referred to actual music. I thought, Nah, this is just avant-garde poetry; there isn't a Concerto No. 2 in G Minor. I wasn't imagining a funky violin in the background and francine harris doing her Vivaldi, dropping a riff on a sonnet to explicate how the violin turns trap and some empty street in Venice, Calif., or Venice, Fla., or Venice, Ill., or Venice, La., gets funky. This is theme music for the end of the pandemic, and poetry to explain it all. Selected by Reginald Dwyane Betts  Concerto No. 2 in G Minor, Op. 8, RV 315 ''L'estate'': I. Allegro mà non molto  By francine j. harris  [Antonio Vivaldi, I Solisti Aquilani, Daniele Orlando]  Underneath generators, if you tune it out, it becomes  its own vow of subaural buzz. Something is generating.  Something lit and moving low to the ground. A hush in festival,  night and how the bus rows the street over stoplights. Picking up  speed, it rounds nothing. No men out tonight. No crickets even  if winter is suffering a heat on all the snow melted and slick  ice quickly black has slipped off into greasy gutters and dried though  at midnight, the orchestra loses it. Breaks out of its trap shell. its lounge  doors. its shivering cymbals, and howls a lost dog into the steady drop  night where beneath the window the squash leaves are still fat and  yellowing a sign of dormant or disaster why night baptizes every  utterance, quickly black and restless children are always out now  of earshot, the red priest of Venice is bowing so lightly you have  to listen at full volume and when the men bellow suddenly into  half empty streets at night, it wakes everyone. everyone at once.  Illustration by R.O. Blechman  Reginald Dwayne Betts is a poet and lawyer. He created the Million Book Project, an initiative to curate microlibraries and install them in prisons across the country. His latest collection of poetry, ''Felon,'' explores the post-incarceration experience. In 2019, he won a National Magazine Award in Essays and Criticism for his article in The Times Magazine about his journey from teenage carjacker to aspiring lawyer. francine j. harris is the author of the poetry collection ''Here is the Sweet Hand,'' (2020) from Farrar, Straus & Giroux. She is currently an associate professor of English at the University of Houston.  Reginald Dwayne Betts is a poet and lawyer. He created the Million Book Project, an initiative to curate microlibraries and install them in prisons across the country. His latest collection of poetry, ''Felon,'' explores the post-incarceration experience. In 2019, he won a National Magazine Award in Essays and Criticism for his article in The Times Magazine about his journey from teenage carjacker to aspiring lawyer. francine j. harris is the author of the poetry collection ''Here is the Sweet Hand,'' (2020) from Farrar, Straus & Giroux. She is currently an associate professor of English at the University of Houston.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007j "
148		"   FEATURE  With Us Or Against Us  By Robert Draper  6,868 words 25 April 2021   24     The regular conference meetings of the Republican lawmakers in the House of Representatives, held most weeks behind closed doors in the Capitol Visitor Center, tend to be predictable and thus irregularly attended affairs. The party leaders -- the House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, the minority whip Steve Scalise and the conference chairwoman Liz Cheney, whose job it is to run these meetings -- typically begin with a few housekeeping matters and then proceed with a discussion of the party's message or issue du jour. The conference's more voluble members line up at the microphone to opine for one to two minutes at a time; the rare newsworthy comment is often leaked and memorialized on Twitter seconds after it is uttered. An hour or so later, the members file out into the corridors of the Capitol and back to their offices, a few of them lingering to talk to reporters.  The conference meeting on the afternoon of Feb. 3 was different in nearly every way. It lasted four hours and nearly all of the G.O.P.'s 210 House members attended. Its stated purpose was to decide whether to remove Cheney from her leadership position.  Three weeks earlier, Cheney announced that she would vote to impeach President Donald Trump over his encouragement of his supporters' storming the Capitol on Jan. 6 -- one of only 10 House Republicans to do so and the only member of the party's leadership. Because her colleagues had elected Cheney to the party's third-highest position in the House, her words were generally seen as expressing the will of the conference, and those words had been extremely clear: ''There has never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States of his office and his oath to the Constitution,'' she said.  The combination of her stature and her unequivocal stand amounted to a clear message from Cheney to House Republicans: If they sided with Trump in challenging the election, they were siding against the Constitution, and against at least one of their elected leaders. The tenor of the Feb. 3 meeting was therefore tense, portentous and deeply personal from beginning to end, according to several attendees who later described it to me.  When it was Cheney's turn to speak, the 54-year-old Wyoming congresswoman began by describing her lifelong reverence for the House, where her father, Dick Cheney, was minority whip more than 30 years ago before serving as George H.W. Bush's secretary of defense and George W. Bush's vice president. But, Cheney went on, she was ''deeply, deeply concerned about where our party is headed.'' Its core principles -- limited government, low taxes, a strong national defense -- were being overshadowed by darker forces. ''We cannot become the party of QAnon,'' she said. ''We cannot become the party of Holocaust denial. We cannot become the party of white supremacy. We all watched in horror what happened on Jan. 6.''  Cheney, alone among House Republicans, had been mentioned by Trump in his speech that day. ''The Liz Cheneys of the world, we got to get rid of them,'' he told his supporters at the Ellipse shortly before they overran the Capitol. The president had been infuriated by Cheney's public insistence that Trump's court challenges to state election results were unpersuasive and that he needed to respect ''the sanctity of our electoral process.'' At the time of Trump's speech, Cheney was in the House cloakroom awaiting the ritual state-by-state tabulation of electoral votes. Her father called her to inform her of Trump's remark. Less than an hour later, a mob was banging against the doors of the House chamber.  In the conference meeting, Cheney said that she stood by her vote to impeach Trump. Several members had asked her to apologize, but, she said, ''I cannot do that.''  The line to the microphone was extraordinarily long. At least half of the speakers indicated that they would vote to remove Cheney. Ralph Norman of South Carolina expressed disappointment in her vote. ''But the other thing that bothers me, Liz,'' he went on, ''is your attitude. You've got a defiant attitude.'' John Rutherford of Florida, a former sheriff, accused the chairwoman of not being a ''team player.''  Others argued that her announcement a day before the impeachment vote had given the Democrats a talking point to use against the rest of the Republican conference. (''Good for her for honoring her oath of office,'' Speaker Nancy Pelosi pointedly remarked when told of Cheney's intentions.) Likening the situation to a football game, Mike Kelly of Pennsylvania lamented, ''You look up into the stands and see your girlfriend on the opposition's side -- that's one hell of a tough thing to swallow.''  ''She's not your girlfriend!'' a female colleague yelled out. Kelly's remark was immediately disseminated among Republican women in professional Washington, according to Barbara Comstock, who served as a Republican congresswoman from Virginia until 2019. ''We emailed that around, just horrified, commenting in real time,'' she told me.  Throughout it all, Cheney sat implacably -- ''as emotional as algebra,'' as one attendee later told me. She spoke only when asked a direct question. But when McCarthy concluded by suggesting that they put this matter behind them and adjourn, Cheney insisted that the conference vote on her status right then and there. The members cast their secret ballots, and Cheney prevailed, 145 to 61.  The lopsided margin was almost identical to Cheney's own whip count going into the conference. Individual colleagues had confided in her that most of the conference was only too happy to move on from Trump -- but saying so in public was another matter. To do so meant risking defeat at the hands of a Trump-adoring Republican primary electorate or even, many of them feared, the well-being of their families. In sum, it risked getting the Liz Cheney treatment. That Cheney was willing to face Trump's wrath called attention to the fact that most of them were not -- a factor in the aggrievement directed at Cheney in the meeting. Lloyd Smucker of Pennsylvania said that Cheney had ''a low E.Q.,'' or emotional quotient. On his way out the door, one congressman remarked, ''I just got to spend four hours listening to a bunch of men complain to a woman that she doesn't take their emotions into account.''  To the one-third of the conference who wanted her removed from the leadership position, Cheney offered no gesture of appeasement. Standing outside the Visitor Center conference room, Cheney described the vote to reporters as ''a very resounding acknowledgment that we can move forward together.'' But this was true in only the most limited sense. A clear fracture in the G.O.P. -- between those who continued to view Trump as the party leader and those, now led by Cheney, who wanted to move past him and his presidency -- went unaddressed. As for Cheney, who had until recently been viewed as a potential rival of McCarthy for the title of House party leader, her standing, and with it her career, was far from a settled matter.  ''The conference voted to keep Liz in that position because we've got bigger fish to fry -- fighting the Democrats, winning the next election -- and this is a distraction from all that,'' Jeff Duncan of South Carolina, who voted against Cheney in the meeting, later told me. But, he added, ''I think there's a huge disconnect with Liz and some others in the conference and the American people. She did have a conservative record. But then she became almost a Never Trumper. And I've been disappointed in her lack of humility. It's struck a lot of people as not only odd, but just as -- wow.''  Liz Cheney became a federal officeholder at the same time Donald Trump did, in January 2017. In the wishful thinking of Republican leaders, her election seemed to offer a model for how the forces that Trump represented might be safely, and profitably, assimilated into the Republican establishment. The two of them were elected on similar platforms: anti-Obamacare, anti-environmental regulation, anti-gun control, anti-apologizing for protecting American interests around the world. During her 2016 campaign, Cheney described Hillary Clinton as a ''felon'' on Rush Limbaugh's radio show and, in response to the ''Access Hollywood'' tape in which Trump bragged about groping women, she said in a statement to a Wyoming radio station, ''Hillary's actions have been far worse.''  For his part, Trump appeared to understand Cheney's stature within the Republican hierarchy. Her party connections extended across generations. She could pick up the phone and call current and former foreign leaders from around the world, particularly in the Middle East. She seemed, on occasion, a human link between the legacy of the last Republican administration and Trump's own, despite their mutual lack of chumminess. Five days into Trump's presidency, the congresswoman expressed her enthusiastic approval when Trump floated the possibility of bringing back waterboarding as an interrogation technique. Cheney later praised Trump for having issued a pardon to her father's former chief of staff, Scooter Libby. Cheney criticized Trump's policies publicly on occasion but with discretion, and Trump rarely fired back.  All that changed when Cheney stood alone among House Republican leaders in refusing to humor Trump's attempts to overturn the 2020 election. Trump won 70 percent of the vote in Wyoming in 2020, his highest share in any state. In Carbon County, the local party chairman, Joey Correnti IV, immediately convened two town halls to take the local temperature. ''A few folks kind of let loose for a bit'' over Cheney's impeachment vote, he told me. ''Talking about tar-and-feathering, riding her out on a rail. That kind of stuff.''  Correnti drafted a resolution of censure -- one of several against pro-impeachment lawmakers by Republican state committees in various states -- that would soon be adopted by the entire state party. In it, the Wyoming G.O.P. called for her immediate resignation and asserted that Cheney had ''violated the trust of her voters.'' Several politicians announced their intentions to challenge her in the 2022 Republican primary. On Jan. 29, one of Cheney's G.O.P. House colleagues, Matt Gaetz, the Florida congressman and performative Trump ally, appeared on the State Capitol steps in Cheyenne, where he pronounced Cheney ''a fake cowgirl'' before posing for fan photos. (Gaetz had been invited by a 27-year-old freshman Wyoming state representative and food-truck entrepreneur, Ocean Andrew, a protégé of Rand Paul, the Republican senator from Kentucky, whose distaste for the Cheneys dates back to the Iraq war.)  On one level, this was a now-familiar story of Trump's presidency and its aftermath: A Republican lawmaker, finally pushed over the line by one or another of Trump's actions, publicly breaks with him, only to see years' worth of alliances, friendships and ideological credibility evaporate overnight. But Cheney was not a backbencher, and she was not only standing on principle.  According to sources who are familiar with Cheney's views, she believes the G.O.P. has been manifestly weakened by Trump. The party now controls neither the executive nor the legislative branch. Twice in a row, Trump lost the popular vote by significant margins, exacerbating a worrisome trend for Republicans that has extended across five of the last six presidential elections. Given all this, Trump's conduct in egging on the rioters presented his party with a political opportunity. By impeaching him, they could wash their hands of Trump and then resume the challenge of winning back majorities of the voting public.  Cheney declined to speak to me on the record for this article, as did many other congressional Republicans. To defend Cheney is to invite the wrath of Trump and his base, while for those members who remain Trump loyalists, interaction of any sort with ''fake news media'' is increasingly to be avoided. But I was able to listen in on Cheney's remarks at a virtual fund-raiser for her on Feb. 8, hosted by more than 50 veteran lobbyists who had each contributed to her political action committee. At the event, Cheney lamented the party's drift away from reality, the extent to which it had become wedded to conspiracy theories. The party's core voters, she said, ''were misled into believing the election was stolen and were betrayed.'' Alongside a legitimate concern over a Biden administration's priorities was ''the idea that the election somehow wasn't over, and that somehow Jan. 6 would change things. People really believed it.''  When one lobbyist raised the specter of Trump re-emerging as the G.O.P.'s dominant force, Cheney responded that the party would have to resist this. Citing the Capitol riot, she said, ''In my view, we can't go down the path of embracing the person who did this or excuse what happened.'' She added: ''We really can't become the party of a cult of personality. It's a really scary phenomenon we haven't seen in this country before. Our oath and our loyalty is to the Constitution, not to an individual -- particularly after what happened on Jan. 6.'' This month, she told Fox News that she would not endorse Trump if he ran again in 2024.  The House G.O.P.'s other two leaders, McCarthy and Scalise, do not subscribe to this view. Before Jan. 6, each man had strongly implied that the November election was rife with serious irregularities while dancing around Trump's brazen claim that it had been stolen outright. Both of them, like many others in their conference, criticized Trump's behavior on Jan. 6 while stopping short of describing it as impeachable.  And both McCarthy and Scalise, according to associates familiar with their thinking, are of the view that the task of winning back the House next year is likelier to occur if the party's relationship with Trump is harmonious. The same day Gaetz strutted into Cheyenne, McCarthy went to see Trump at Mar-a-Lago. The widely circulated photo of the two men standing and smiling together at the resort suggested that a path had been chosen for the party, and it was not Cheney's.  Still, many establishment Republicans have rallied around Cheney. Mitch McConnell, the Senate Republican leader, publicly congratulated her on surviving the conference vote. ''Liz's primary is absolutely the most symbolic race in the country right now,'' said Julie Conway, the executive director of the Republican women's political action committee VIEW PAC. ''She's the proverbial canary in the coal mine. I mean, is the party ready to get back to principled leaders with substance and a moral compass? Or have we become a party that sees Congress as a source of entertainment and intellectual cotton candy?''  Conway's group hosted a virtual fund-raiser for Cheney just two hours before the Feb. 3 conference meeting. Its nearly 40 co-hosts included former Republican members of Congress -- Comstock, Phil English and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen -- as well as alumni from the George W. Bush administration and prominent Washington lobbyists. Some of them cried as they talked about what the party had become under Trump. ''It was like the biggest therapy session I'd ever been a part of,'' said one of the hosts I spoke with later. Another host, the former Bush solicitor general Ted Olson, told me, ''I'm very concerned about the direction the party's being taken by -- I hate to use the word 'leadership,' because outside of the courage Liz has shown, I'm not sure how you'd even define that term.''  On Feb. 28, Trump gave the first speech of his post-presidency, at the annual CPAC convention in Orlando. After rattling off all the names of the seven Republican senators who had recently voted to convict him, along with the nine rank-and-file G.O.P. House members who had voted to impeach, the ex-president bore down on his primary target. ''And of course, the warmonger, a person that loves seeing our troops fighting, Liz Cheney,'' Trump declared to lavish boos. ''How about that? The good news is in her state, she's been censured, and in her state, her poll numbers have dropped faster than any human being I've ever seen. So hopefully they'll get rid of her with the next election.''  Though Cheney grew up in proximity to power, it wasn't preordained that she would seek it herself. Raised in Wyoming and the Washington suburb of McLean, Va., she was a high school cheerleader and a babysitter of neighborhood kids. After graduating from Colorado College -- the alma mater of her mother, Lynne Cheney -- in 1988 she worked for USAID in Poland, Hungary and China before going to work on privatization efforts in the former Soviet Union at the State Department under Richard Armitage, who had served with her father at the Pentagon during the George H.W. Bush administration.  Eight years later, when George W. Bush picked the elder Cheney as his running mate, Liz was put in charge of his debate preparation. ''Liz didn't hesitate to bust her dad's chops,'' said the Republican consultant and author Stuart Stevens, who assisted in the debate prep sessions at Dick Cheney's home outside the resort town Jackson Hole. ''We did these formal run-throughs where the Cheney women would grill him on his past record. 'You voted against Martin Luther King Day -- I mean, really, Dad? Really?' It was clear that he was in this matriarchy.''  Under the new administration, Liz Cheney went back to work at the State Department for Armitage, who had been named Colin Powell's deputy secretary of state. Cheney reported directly to the assistant secretary for Near Eastern affairs, Bill Burns, who is now Biden's C.I.A. director. Though Powell's department and her father's Office of the Vice President bitterly clashed over the decision to invade Iraq and other foreign-policy matters, Armitage recalled Liz Cheney as being ''mission-oriented'' and did not question her loyalty.  The criticisms over the Iraq war in general, and her father's role in particular, seemed to colleagues to intensify Liz Cheney's hawkishness. She co-wrote the former vice president's distinctly unapologetic 2011 memoir, ''In My Time,'' and during Barack Obama's presidency she appeared frequently on cable news and the Sunday shows to defend Bush's belated troop surge as a success while excoriating Obama's subsequent drawdown from Iraq. As a pundit, she developed an on-air persona that suggested a more energetic and cutting version of her father's plain-faced certitude.  By 2012, she and her husband, Phil Perry, were co-hosting House G.O.P. fund-raisers with her father in Jackson Hole -- a clear-enough indicator of her own political aspirations. Her first campaign, an attempt to unseat the longtime Wyoming Republican senator Mike Enzi in 2014, was a bust, viewed even among her allies as a case of overshooting. Two years later, Cheney announced that she would run for the state's lone House seat, soon to be vacated by the Republican Cynthia Lummis.  Undaunted by accusations of carpetbagging, she leaned heavily on her family's roots and Rolodex. She assured the state's fossil-fuel industry that there was one war she did in fact stand against: Obama's so-called war on coal. She vowed to repeal the Affordable Care Act and enact tort reform in its place. She labeled the Obama administration's Common Core educational initiative a case of ''big government interference'' and promised to shred it. Most notably, she opposed same-sex marriage, despite the fact that her sister, Mary, was married to a woman.  Cheney's stridency on same-sex marriage, while infuriating her sister, also marked a rare difference in views from their father, whose support for the rights of gay couples stretched back over a decade. ''To be for civil unions as a Republican in 2000,'' as Cheney was, ''was arguably disqualifying,'' Stevens told me. ''And Cheney made a big point of disclosing it to Bush. 'This is what I believe, and I'm not going to change.' And he didn't care if that meant he wasn't on the ticket.''  Stevens added, ''I think you can draw a direct line from what Dick Cheney said then to what Liz Cheney's doing now.''  The first sign of unresolvable differences between Cheney and Trump occurred over foreign policy. At a meeting in the Oval Office in December 2018, Cheney and other Republican members of Congress tried to dissuade President Trump from his plan to withdraw American troops from Afghanistan and Syria. A recurring theme in the ''America First'' platform on which Trump campaigned, and one of the few consistent themes in his foreign-policy views over the years, was that America had been mired in ''endless wars'' without adequate assistance from allies. These allies, he charged, also failed to pay their full NATO dues and in other ways played his presidential predecessors for suckers.  Cheney believed with similar conviction that an American military presence in places like Afghanistan was necessary to combat terrorism. And from the beginning of Trump's presidency, she had similarly objected to Trump's apparent favoritism of Vladimir Putin over America's NATO allies. Putting her objections in terms that she believed Trump would understand, she said to him in the White House: ''I thought it was wrong for Barack Obama to withdraw troops for political reasons. And I think it would be wrong for you to do the same thing here.''  Cheney was a member of the House Armed Services Committee who was seen by her colleagues as possessing an advanced political acumen, so much so that she was elected as the House G.O.P.'s conference chair at the end of 2018 despite having served only a single term. Such positions would, during previous presidencies, have given her standing to weigh in on matters like troop deployments. And to the extent that Republicans on the Hill did voice opposition to Trump, foreign policy was usually the safest ground on which to do so, because the president's supporters tended not to get riled up over NATO contributions.  Still, Cheney's willingness to speak in such stern terms to Trump's face contrasted sharply with the deference most of her colleagues showed to him. ''In past Republican administrations, it was OK to speak up and disagree on things,'' the former congresswoman Barbara Comstock told me. ''That was Liz's experience. These new ideologues, that's not what they did. If you spoke up at the White House, they'd look at you like you were crazy. Trump would show up at conferences and point to different members and tell them how great they were on TV, and then they'd hang out at the White House.''  Cheney remained enough of a Trump ally to lead the House G.O.P.'s messaging fight against Pelosi's Democrats over the first impeachment of Trump for pressuring the new president of Ukraine to investigate Trump's likely opponent in the presidential election, Joe Biden. She chided the Democrats for rushing the vote. ''It's a system and a process like we've never seen before, and it's really disgraceful,'' Cheney said during one TV appearance. Voting to impeach Trump under such circumstances ''may permanently damage our republic,'' she warned on the House floor.  Even at the time, however, a distancing was palpable. Cheney conspicuously refrained from commenting on, much less explaining away or endorsing, Trump's strong-arming efforts. She publicly criticized as ''shameful'' Republicans' questioning the patriotism of Alexander Vindman, the Army officer and National Security Council staff member who testified in the inquiry.  Still, it took the coronavirus pandemic to make permanent the gulf between Trump and Cheney. According to sources familiar with her thinking, it was not the president's wholesale failure of empathy that she found wanting, but instead his rejection of science. The president's cavalier prediction in February, that the virus was an ethereal blip that would pass ''like a miracle,'' disturbed her. Cheney's father had suffered multiple heart attacks and was therefore at high risk if he contracted the virus. For this reason, she was a no-show at the House G.O.P.'s leadership meeting at St. Michaels, Md., in early March 2020.  On May 12 of last year, Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, incurred the wrath of Trump supporters by stating that the coronavirus would not simply ''disappear'' in the next few months as Trump had promised. Cheney publicly defended Fauci, tweeting that he was ''one of the finest public servants we have ever had.'' That was among the transgressions cited in a July virtual conference by members of the right-wing House Freedom Caucus, including Jim Jordan and Andy Biggs, as evidence that Cheney was out of step with the party. Their insistence on defending Trump's obvious dereliction struck Cheney as further evidence that the Republican Party was in danger of losing its moorings.  During a news conference on Sept. 23, Trump was asked if he would commit to a peaceful transition should Biden win the election. ''Well, we're going to have to see what happens,'' he replied, adding that ''I've been complaining very strongly about the ballots, and the ballots are a disaster.'' In response, Cheney tweeted the next day: ''The peaceful transfer of power is enshrined in our Constitution and fundamental to the survival of our Republic. America's leaders swear an oath to the Constitution. We will uphold that oath.''  By ''we,'' the chairwoman seemed to be speaking for her entire conference -- or more accurately speaking to them, stating in tersely Cheney-esque fashion that failing to follow her lead would place the republic in danger. Indeed, by this juncture only the most Pollyanna-ish of Republicans could fail to see that Trump would never concede defeat. His most zealous supporters joined him in forecasting a ''rigged election''; others simply tried to dodge the implications for as long as possible.  McCarthy, the minority leader, fell in the latter category. The day that Cheney tweeted her commitment to a peaceful transfer of power, McCarthy asserted during a briefing that the Democrats were likeliest to contest the outcome, adding, ''There will be a smooth transition, and I believe President Trump will have a very good inaugural.''  In December, well after the election results had clearly established Biden as the winner, numerous Republican elected officials refused to accept the outcome and began showing up at ''Stop the Steal'' rallies in swing states that went for Biden. Cheney produced a 21-page memo rebutting the ''Stop the Steal'' claims state by state and disseminated it on Jan. 3, hoping that it would sway fellow House Republicans to put the election and Trump behind them.  It did not. On the evening of Jan. 6, hours after members of Congress had been ushered back into the House chamber under heavy security following the storming of the Capitol, Cheney voted to certify the election results. But the balance within the party had tilted far the other way. Newly elected members like Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina (who spoke at the Trump rally that morning) and Lauren Boebert of Colorado (who tweeted that morning, ''Today is 1776'') had joined Freedom Caucus members like Jordan and Paul Gosar of Arizona in loudly contesting the results. Nearly two-thirds of the House Republicans voted to overturn them in at least one state.  The censure passed by the central committee of the Wyoming Republican Party after Cheney's impeachment vote, three weeks later, included a request that the congresswoman meet with the committee and explain her apostasies. Cheney did not. ''She's basically taken the attitude that the Republican Party isn't something she needs to interact with,'' Karl Allred, one of the committee members, told me. ''I really hate that attitude.''  The State Capitol building in Cheyenne opened in 1888, two years before Wyoming became America's 44th state. It is ornate if strikingly pint-size, its walls covered with framed photos of bearded white throwbacks from a Wild West yesteryear. When I arrived there on a snowy morning in late March, the legislative session was reaching a fever pitch.  Wyoming politics tend conservative and libertarian, shot through with an independent streak owed in large part to the state's longstanding disgruntlement with the federal government's influence there, which is extensive even by the standards of Western states. Nearly half of Wyoming's land is federally owned, as are two-thirds of the mineral reserves that underwrite the state's largest industry, energy production.  Wyoming's coal production exceeds that of any other state. But domestic demand for the fuel has been cut by more than a third over the past decade, primarily because of the cheap natural gas yielded from fracking. The shipping ports and rail lines that might send the coal to markets elsewhere are in blue states like Washington, Oregon and California, where climate-conscious lawmakers have passed laws banning coal transportation. To protect its hobbled industry, Wyoming legislators have attempted not-entirely-conservative measures like taxing solar facilities and further regulating wind farms.  All of this made the state particularly susceptible to Trump and the right-wing politics that have outlasted his presidency. The Republican Party has dominated Wyoming politics so thoroughly for so long that liberal policy victories are basically unheard of, so it was peculiar to find a legislative agenda crowded with measures tilting against a cultural and political moment that did not seem likely to arrive in Cheyenne anytime soon. One education bill, advanced by the Republican representative Jeremy Haroldson, would, as he described it, promote the view that ''slavery was not maybe what it has been painted in the nation, completely.'' A bill co-sponsored by a state senator and septic-pumping serviceman named Anthony Bouchard would allow the state's conceal-carry gun permit to include out-of-state residents, though there had been no particular public outcry for such an extension.  Bouchard was the first politician to announce his intention to challenge Cheney in the 2022 Republican primary. Another primary opponent, the state representative and conservative radio talk-show host Chuck Gray, happened to be speaking on the floor when I arrived in the chamber. Gray had introduced a statewide voter-ID bill, which passed the House and would later be signed into law despite the lack of evidence of its necessity (even the conservative Heritage Foundation has found only three isolated instances of individuals voting fraudulently in the state over the past two decades) or even strategic value (Republican candidates in the state rarely face serious challenges from Democrats).  But the most noteworthy bill to be debated on the floor that day was a measure that would require a runoff in Wyoming primary elections if the top vote-getter failed to receive 50 percent. The bill, introduced by Senator Bo Biteman, was transparently clear in its purpose: to make it harder for Liz Cheney to prevail in 2022 over a crowded field splitting the anti-Cheney vote.  Donald Trump Jr. and President Trump's former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski had both commented positively on the bill, and Trump Jr. had been rumored among Wyoming Republicans as a possible Cheney challenger himself. Other exotic possibilities included the Blackwater founder Erik Prince, who owns a home in Wyoming, and the Rockefeller heiress and Florida socialite Catharine O'Neill, a columnist for the far-right online publication Newsmax and the daughter of a Trump donor, who filed paperwork in January suggesting her intentions to run in the state.  As for Gray and Bouchard, ''They're probably dead in the water if the bill goes down,'' Landon Brown, a Republican state representative from Cheyenne, told me in an office adjacent to the House floor. Hours later, the legislation did indeed fail to pass. Nevertheless, Brown said, Cheney is hardly a lock to win next year. ''People like my parents, who loved all the Cheneys but are die-hard Trump supporters, will never vote for her again,'' he said. ''They can't stand her.''  ''I love Donald Trump,'' said Joey Correnti, the author of the original Cheney censure resolution, who told me that he went to considerable effort to have both his post-office box and the last four digits of his cellphone consist of the number 1776. ''When he stood on that stage of 17 Republican candidates, I knew then that he'd be the only one who could drag America kicking and screaming through all the growing pains it needed to ge"
149		"t to where we are now.''  Still, Correnti acknowledged, Trump loyalty alone would not defeat Cheney. ''Whoever does become the prime challenger to Cheney is going to have a hard, expensive road ahead,'' he said. ''So hopefully the people of Wyoming and Trump can come to an agreement.'' Trump announced in a recent statement that he would soon be making an endorsement in the primary and warned against the risk of a crowded field, noting that ''so many people are looking to run against Crazy Liz Cheney -- but we only want one.'' Already, Bouchard was angling to be Trump's anointed candidate, posting MAGA sentiments on his Twitter page while describing Cheney in campaign emails as ''DC Swamp Royalty.''  The national party has affected a posture of studied neutrality on the prospect of a Republican leader being primaried by a Trump-endorsed opponent. The National Republican Congressional Committee ''does not get involved in primaries,'' Michael McAdams, the organization's communications director, told me. But others in the party are rallying to Cheney's defense. Adam Kinzinger, the Illinois Republican congressman and frequent Trump critic who also voted for impeachment, recently started a political action committee of his own, Country First, that aims to support anti-Trump Republicans like Cheney. ''She just has to get through this moment,'' Kinzinger said. ''Look, this whole cancel culture of the right, it's about people who feel threatened because they look bad when someone like Liz is strong and actually stands for what she believes. I think she'll survive.''  Still, simply surviving as Wyoming's lone congresswoman was not what anyone would have anticipated even a couple of years ago for Dick Cheney's daughter. While reporting this article, it was jarring to recall all the expectations from the G.O.P. establishment and the Beltway press that attended her in her first days in the Capitol: the party's first female House speaker or even its first female vice president or president. Almost no one I spoke with voiced such hopes for her today.  One of her friends who served with her in the Bush administration, who asked not to be named while speaking candidly of his party's internal dynamics, told me that he urged her to run last year for the seat that Mike Enzi was retiring from in the Senate, where Trump loyalty was less maniacally enforced. ''I said to her, 'You've got to run for the Senate -- the House is becoming a terrible place,''' the friend recalled. ''And that was well before all the impeachment stuff.'' After Cheney's vote, ''there's this cohort of House Republicans that can't not attack her.''  ''Maybe that will subside and the Trump effect will wear off,'' the friend went on. ''But the history of politics doesn't consist of two-year periods. These movements last 10 or 15 years. And that's your whole career.''  On a sunny Thursday morning in March, Cheney convened a news conference on the section of the eastern lawn of the Capitol complex known as the Triangle. She and about 30 other House Republicans, including McCarthy and Scalise, were there to discuss what a cardboard prop called ''Biden's Border Crisis.''  Given the popularity of Biden's $1.9 trillion Covid stimulus bill and the continued progress of the vaccine rollouts, the Republicans were eager to change the subject. They were also eager to project a unity of purpose, to voice agreement on something -- to be a whole and somewhat normal party again. Peter Meijer of Michigan and John Katko of New York, two of the other Republican members who had voted to impeach Trump, were in attendance.  The event consisted of a succession of minute-long condemnations of the new president and his failure to stem the flow of the hundred thousand migrants who had shown up at the U.S.'s Southern border in the month of February alone. Cheney's turn at the microphone came after McCarthy and Scalise. Even though she said little, her brisk and determinedly unflamboyant delivery harked back to her performances a decade ago, during Obama's presidency, as an imperturbable Sunday-show critic of a Democratic administration. Even more notable was the fact that everyone at the Triangle sounded like one another, reciting the same talking points, suggesting that she and her colleague-antagonists were at last on the same page.  Or so it appeared until about 24 hours later, when Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene decided that it was time to weigh in. The Georgia freshman and Trump acolyte now had considerable time on her hands after a House majority -- including 11 Republicans, though not Cheney -- voted to strip her of her committee assignments on account of her conspiratorial and violence-espousing social media presence before taking office. Now she was introducing her Protect America First Act, which would enforce a four-year moratorium on all immigration and complete Trump's unfinished border wall, which would be named in his honor.  The bill was destined to go nowhere, but in its transparent effort to flatter Trump and further the policies most symbolically associated with him, it was a reminder of how closely he hovered over the party, regardless of Cheney's attempts to sideline him. Greene's defiance of Cheney's attempt at party unity also served as a reminder of the numerous Republican lawmakers who had not been there with Cheney at the Triangle. The absent included not just reliable detractors like Gaetz -- who, it would soon be reported, had come under federal investigation for sex-trafficking allegations, which he has denied -- and Greene but also colleagues like Dan Crenshaw of Texas and Nancy Mace of South Carolina, who had both publicly defended Cheney not long before. Cheney was now a polarizing brand of her own. To stand beside her was tantamount to standing with her, which in turn meant standing against the dominant force in Republican politics.  A conservative lobbyist told me of calls she received from others in her profession who supported Cheney but feared the consequences of attaching their name to a fund-raising event for her. A number of her prominent past supporters in Wyoming did not seem eager to invite renewed local wrath by discussing Cheney with me.  In Cheyenne, I went to see Matt Micheli, a 45-year-old lawyer who served as Wyoming's Republican Party chairman in 2016. ''I think she views what's happening now as a fight for the heart and soul of the Republican Party,'' he told me of Cheney. ''It really is a battle between the traditional Reagan-style conservative and the performative politics of the Matt Gaetz wing of the party. And if she succeeds, she's positioned to be the leader of that post-Trump party.''  The hesitant tone in Micheli's voice suggested that a ''but'' was coming. ''We've redefined what it means to be conservative,'' he continued ruefully. ''I could go through issue by issue, and I guarantee you I'd be more conservative than you on every single one of them. But that doesn't matter anymore, right? It's all about being angry and obnoxious and demonstrating how loyal you are to Donald Trump.''  Micheli chose not to run for re-election for the party chairmanship in 2017, in part because he did not wish to pretend to be a Trump cheerleader. ''What would happen if you ran for state party chair today?'' I asked.  He answered immediately. ''If I wouldn't endorse the conspiracy theories that have overtaken so much of my party, which I won't,'' he said, ''I'd get crushed.''  Robert Draper is a writer at large for the magazine. He is the author of several books, most recently, ''To Start a War: How the Bush Administration Took America Into Iraq,'' which was excerpted in the magazine. Clay Rodery is a freelance illustrator and figurative artist in Brooklyn. He currently teaches illustration at Montclair State University in New Jersey.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustrations by Clay Rodery FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007d "
150		"    Bonus Advice From Judge John Hodgman  190 words 25 April 2021   18     Matt writes: Because of the pandemic, my wife has been cutting our toddler's hair. I volunteered to give Davi his next haircut and want to give him a mullet. My wife thinks mullets are ugly. But I think it would be unique and possibly trendsetting among a younger demographic.  I judge that last sentence a lie. Unless you're proposing a sincere homage to the uniquely beautiful mullet of Lou Diamond Phillips in the 1980s, you know what you're doing: You're turning your child into a joke. I get it. It's hard at first to appreciate that your children are human beings, not dress-up dolls for flashing your taste in bands, politics and ironic haircuts. You may offer Davi a variety of '80s/'90s cuts and let him choose -- but only if you get the same haircut yourself. Maybe you'll both end up looking like Billy Ray Cyrus -- your dream come true! But personally, I hope you get Mark McGrath's frosted tips.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Louise Zergaeng Pomeroy FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007g "
151		"    My Father Has Been Brainwashed by YouTube Videos. Can I Reprogram His Feed?  By Kwame Anthony Appiah  1,360 words 25 April 2021   18     The magazine's Ethicist columnist on dealing with a parent radicalized by a recommendation engine and whether to cut off a friend who has joined a cult.  For nearly his entire life, my 80-something-year-old father has been a quiet, gentle and deeply religious man who went to Mass and said the rosary daily. Although his political views have always been conservative, he has also always believed in kindness and fairness. Since the start of the pandemic, his social interactions have become severely reduced, limited to daily calls from me (I live across the country), weekly visits from my brother and the occasional shopping trips and church attendance. As our mother passed away before the pandemic, his one loyal companion has been his iPad and YouTube. Because of his viewing of religious programs, YouTube has increasingly steered him toward conservative media, so that he is now obsessed with right-wing extremist politics and is absolutely against taking the Covid vaccine. Every time my brother or I have a conversation with him, he talks politics and pushes his views, and even after we asked him to stop, he tries to get the last word in by sending us angry emails or texts. Now both of us try to avoid having any interactions with him. I have the password to his YouTube account from a year ago when I helped him with a tech problem. In order to preserve our relationship, I'm thinking about going into his account to delete and pause his viewing history, and perhaps put in some links to more wholesome entertainment such as music and soccer to counter the constant bombardment of extremism. My justification is that if he is being brainwashed by an algorithm, then I might as well use the algorithm to steer him back to his old self so that we can at least have a normal conversation. What is your view on this? Name Withheld  The phenomenon you're describing has been widely discussed and reported on, including in this publication. There's widespread concern that YouTube's recommendation engine has had the unintended consequence of radicalizing certain viewers by offering them progressively more inflammatory takes on political, or politicized, topics. (YouTube says it has made adjustments in recent years to favor trusted journalistic outlets over sources of what it calls ''borderline content and harmful misinformation.'')  So I understand the temptation. I'd certainly be tempted to modify the feeds of a few people I know -- and yes, they probably return the sentiment. But let's be clear: You are considering treating your father as no longer competent to manage his own viewing. (You're not simply proposing to send him scientifically sound links about vaccines, say.) You don't suggest, though, that he suffers from the cognitive or psychiatric problems that would justify such treatment. Indeed, if YouTube's recommendation engine can have bad effects on putatively normal people, the fact that it has had an adverse effect on your father isn't necessarily evidence of impairment.  At the same time, your father doesn't seem to realize how alienating his behavior is. Rather than manipulating him in the way you propose, you might make him face up to the choice he actually faces: He either stops talking about this stuff with you, or you'll stop spending so much time with him. You value your relationship with your father. But it's only truly valuable if he values his relationship with you as well.  One of my wife's friends of longest standing has been engaged with a cult. While it initially looked like a quirky pseudoreligious encounter, she is now exhibiting quite concerning behaviors, steeped in conspiracy theories. She has two children with her ex-husband: an older child who decided to live with the father, and a younger child who, when we last saw them, behaved strangely, acting out characters of what her mother called previous lives. We thought at first that this was a comedy act, but it turned out to be serious! Part of the belief system is a strange relationship to food and nutrition, and the child looked pretty slim, bordering on malnourished. The cult itself practices certain procedures that look sexually abusive to us, cloaked in the mantra of alternative healing.  My wife feels that she cannot keep up this friendship anymore; it is draining, especially with the insistent preaching about the cult, which borders on the emotionally abusive. I would go a step further, given our friend's latest post on social media, and call her a fascist. The question for us is how can we ensure that her child is safe, and whether terminating contact would result in both the friend and her child being dragged deeper into this cult, one that seems increasingly abusive and isolating? Name Withheld  Given your worries, you should certainly contact the child's other parent. You could also contact the local authorities responsible for his or her welfare, who could conduct an examination. Of course, your worries are not limited to straight out abuse and neglect. You think that this child is being indoctrinated into a community and a belief system that are out of touch with reality and psychologically abusive.  Cults are a tricky subject in the liberal-democratic tradition. The beliefs of most religious traditions look strange from the perspective of those in other traditions or none. So, within broad limits, liberal societies have decided to leave religious upbringing to families, while supporting the ability of adults to exit such communities. That's the right balance, I think, but those of us who believe in this liberal solution must acknowledge that it doesn't always work very well for people reared in ways far from the local norms. They may be ill-prepared for the society outside their group, even putting aside the significant burden of dislocation and the loss of friends and family.  But many occult organizations need not be accorded the deference normally given to religions, because they do not ask for it. The group you're describing sounds as if it has debts to certain theosophist teachings. Yet latter-day esotericists often define themselves not in religious but in therapeutic terms, as offering techniques for healing or meditation, and making health claims for their practices and prescriptions. As the previous letter suggests, there can certainly be alternate systems of belief -- vide the esotericism of QAnon -- that aren't constituted as religions, and some prove both all-consuming and deeply concerning.  Again, however, there's a reason that we collectively give such groups wide latitude, as we give people wide latitude in their parenting choices. We can regret features of these belief communities while fearing highly intrusive state policies more. Outside the reporting of what child welfare officials would consider actual endangerment, you and your wife are, as individuals, further limited in what you can do. Your wife is hardly obliged to maintain a relationship she finds onerous; but if you think that, through gentle suasion, you could be helpful by staying in touch, by all means do so. Just bear in mind that it is an ethical demerit when our dealings with other people -- even those with disturbingly mistaken views -- are simply manipulative.  Kwame Anthony Appiah teaches philosophy at N.Y.U. His books include ''Cosmopolitanism,'' ''The Honor Code'' and ''The Lies That Bind: Rethinking Identity.'' To submit a query: Send an email to ethicist@nytimes.com; or send mail to The Ethicist, The new_york_times Magazine, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. (Include a daytime phone number.)  Kwame Anthony Appiah teaches philosophy at N.Y.U. His books include ''Cosmopolitanism,'' ''The Honor Code'' and ''The Lies That Bind: Rethinking Identity.'' To submit a query: Send an email to ethicist@nytimes.com; or send mail to The Ethicist, The new_york_times Magazine, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. (Include a daytime phone number.)  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tomi Un FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0007f "
152		    The New York  Times  Magazine  4 words 25 April 2021   2     Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006s 
153		"   METROPOLITAN DIARY 'While I Was Away, My Boss Had Flowers Delivered to My Apartment'  872 words 25 April 2021   4     Something to celebrate, a rolling card game and more reader tales of New York City in this week's Metropolitan Diary.  Flower Delivery  Dear Diary:  In January, I left New York briefly in favor of warmer weather. While I was away, my boss had flowers delivered to my apartment in the West Village as congratulations for reaching my one-year anniversary with our company. In her celebratory haste, she forgot I was out of town.  I didn't want the beautiful arrangement to go to waste, so I texted my super.  ''There are flowers arriving for me today and I am not there,'' I wrote. ''Please give them to your wife!''  I thought that was kind of me.  ''No,'' he replied. ''I'll just place them inside your apartment.''  I thought that was kind of bizarre.  A week later, I arrived home to a snowstorm. It was absolutely freezing outside. Unfortunately, it was also freezing inside. My radiator wasn't working.  Curled up in a thick blanket with two layers of clothing on, I texted the super. He arrived promptly to fix the problem. Minutes later, I heard him cheer  ''Yes!''  ''You fixed it?'' I asked.  ''No,'' he said. ''But my wife just confirmed that she signed the divorce papers.''  A few minutes later, I heard the whistling sound of heat coming through the radiator.  -- Bridget Evans  Knees and Hands  Dear Diary:  I was on a morning train from New Haven to Grand Central. Three people got on and sat in a four-seat section, two seats facing on either side, at the head of the car.  At a subsequent stop, a man got on the train. In one deft move, he sat down with the three people, freed the poster that was mounted on the wall nearby and positioned it on the eight collected knees. A deck of cards appeared, and the game began.  When the train arrived at Grand Central, the poster was returned to its rightful place, the cards were put away and the foursome went their separate ways.  -- Stephen Condict  Spot Saver  Dear Diary:  When my car is parked in a ''good spot'' -- one that I wouldn't have to give up to comply with alternate-side parking rules -- I know that when I pull out in the morning for my teaching job in Connecticut, the doorman who works down the block will be waiting for me in his silver Subaru. It's a parking dance that's been going on for about 20 years  One Thursday morning, I was in the car adjusting my mirrors and plugging in my phone when the doorman pulled alongside me with his passenger-side window down.  ''Hey,'' he said. ''What time do you come back to the city?''  ''Um, around 4:30 or 5,'' I said.  ''If you get here by 4, you can have the spot back,'' he said.  I thanked him, thinking to myself that he had never asked that before. And as he backed up to give me room to pull out, it occurred to me that it would be an ideal time to ask his name.  After all these years, I still had no idea what it was.  -- Kimberly Steinhorn  Scattered Coins  Dear Diary:  I was a music student living on the Upper West Side, and I was rushing to catch the subway for an orchestra rehearsal downtown.  I made in onto the platform just as the train doors began to close. I reached out, wallet in hand, and stopped them from closing completely. I assumed they would spring back open, but they didn't.  As the train began to move, I realized my hand was more important than my wallet and pulled back. The wallet fell to the floor inside the train. I could see the coin purse pop open, scattering coins all over. Dejected, I made a mental list of everything I now needed to replace.  That night at home, a young woman called. Had I lost a wallet in a subway train that afternoon? Yes, I said.  We agreed on a place to meet, and when we did, the wallet was intact: money, cards and all -- including coins. The people on the train had collected nearly all of them, the woman said.  -- Barbara Shacklett  Flawless  Dear Diary:  I went to a tailor in the West Village to have a few pairs of pants let out. He told me it would not be possible to make the alteration I was hoping for on these particular trousers.  He then proceeded to get down on the floor and demonstrate the proper way to do situps. After doing 10 flawless ones, he snapped back up and advised me to do the same situps 15 minutes each night before going to bed because it ''makes you very sleepy.''  I thanked him very much, returned to my apartment and went online to order pants in the next waist size up.  -- Bill Oberlander  Read all recent entries and our submissions guidelines . Reach us via email diary@nytimes.com or follow @NYTMetro on Twitter.  Illustrations by Agnes Lee  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006o "
154		"   CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  A Bigger World Comes Into View From Your Couch  By Elisabeth Vincentelli  1,811 words 25 April 2021   4     Without international tours, streaming high-concept, director-driven European theater is the next best thing to being there.  In October 1973, Arena Stage in Washington took its productions of ''Inherit the Wind'' and ''Our Town'' to Moscow and Leningrad for ''the first American theatrical performances on the Soviet stage in memory,'' according to The new_york_times.  A teenager named Dmitry Krymov was so bowled over by ''Our Town'' that he returned the next day. He grew up to become one of the world's finest theatermakers, and ''Our Town'' plays a pivotal role in his wonderfully evocative recent memory play, ''We Are All Here,'' which tracks Krymov's relationship with Grover's Corners over the course of his life, and peaks in an emotional gut punch doubling as a visual masterstroke, with the cast lined up on a slowly rising bridge.  The good news is that I was able to take in Krymov's show earlier this month. The less-good news is that I saw it online.  And that, in a nutshell, is what the past year has been for fans of border- and boundary-crossing theater: increased access, curtailed experience.  Audiences in New York (and other cities that regularly host international companies) have long been able to discover theatrical ideas, techniques and aesthetics that can be radically different from the ones we encounter in the United States.  Indeed, American theatergoers can be taken aback by another culture's conception of the art form. Very roughly, if the playwright, dead or alive, rules in the United States, in Europe it's the director who is the focus.  But as Krymov learned in 1973, opening one's mind to different possibilities is also incredibly exciting.  The main problem is that travel was even harder this past year than it was between the United States and the Soviet Union in the 1970s. And sharing a physical space has always been a key to the more adventurous experiences, the ones that make us question our artistic assumptions: The impact of a show by Italy's Romeo Castellucci, France's Ariane Mnouchkine or Poland's Krystian Lupa can only be fully felt in real life.  When you are in the room, you can see how Mnouchkine reconfigures the very idea of the theatrical space by placing movable sets on casters or having the actors get ready for a performance in full view of the audience.  In the room, Scott Gibbons's tectonic soundscapes, which are an integral part of Castellucci productions, feel as if they are pressing on your chest. Audiences entering ''The Four Seasons Restaurant'' at Philadelphia's FringeArts festival, in 2014, were handed earplugs, and no, raising the volume on headphones at home just isn't the same (you can try with another Castellucci show, ''Inferno,'' available in full on Vimeo).  In the room, you can be awed by the supersize scope and the way live and videotaped perspectives intermingle in Ivo van Hove's ''The Damned.''  And in the room, you can thrill to an audience's response to the moment. It's possibly even more exciting when you're in the enthusiastic minority in a sea of haters, ''Rite of Spring''-style: I can still hear the slaps of seats springing back up as enraged patrons left in the middle of Jan Lauwers's berserk ''King Lear'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and that was 20 years ago.  But just like that, the pandemic closed borders: we will have to do without outré tableaus from visiting companies for the foreseeable future. The sudden disappearance of international theatrical touring did not make headlines in America last year: Our shellshocked stages went into survival mode, and a much needed discussion of racism in theater took precedence.  Obviously I am not begrudging any of that -- the reckoning was overdue -- but I couldn't deny the dull ache I felt for what was missing.  It was somewhat alleviated, at least, when we switched from glaring at supertitles to glaring at subtitles, as the digital floodgates opened and theaters all over the world began streaming both shows in their repertoires and new projects.  Krymov's ''We Are All Here,'' for example, was just one of 15 subtitled captures I binged over five days of watching this year's Golden Mask Festival. These were part of the Moscow-based festival's showcase section, called Russian Case, which offers works available for tour bookings.  Some of them were entrancing even on a screen, like Mihhail Plutahhin's hypnotic ''The Observers,'' which consisted of handlers wordlessly moving objects rescued from forced-labor camps this way and that on a table.  Yury Butusov's staging of the Florian Zeller drama ''The Son'' was so bizarre that it was compelling on its own terms -- the actors' histrionic line readings were refreshingly free of any attempt at psychologizing. The popular writer Vladimir Sorokin's ''Spin'' was staged by Yury Kvyatkovsky in a glass house, where we spied a rich family reveling in a decadent boozy brunch via surveillance cameras.  Not everything worked, especially the shows that illustrated Regietheater (or director's theater) run amok, like the incomprehensible commedia dell'arte-influenced production ''Pinocchio. Theater.''  ''Investigation of Horror,'' which recreated a soiree of 1930s avant-garde philosophers, complete with real-time potato-peeling and intense debates, looked at times like a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody. After I admitted, in a postfestival debrief on Zoom, to having been bewildered by a modern-dress adaptation of Dostoyevsky's ''The Idiot,'' another viewer reassured me by saying, ''I'm Russian, I read the book, and I had no idea what was going on.''  None of the Russian Case shows I watched were of the naturalistic bent most common in the United States. I never caught a glimpse of characters desultorily chit-chatting on a couch plopped center stage.  Come to think of it, there was not much desultory chitchat at all.  In her introductory note to ''Investigation of Horror,'' the Russian Case curator Marina Davydova wrote: ''Watching relationships between characters is getting boring -- it is much more interesting to observe ideas fleshing out.''  This applied even to the most traditional productions, which always had a twist, like ''The Son'' and its outré Expressionism, or the Latvian director Alvis Hermanis's brilliant bioplay ''Gorbachev'' having the virtuosic Yevgeny Mironov in the title role as Mikhail Gorbachev and Chulpan Khamatova as his wife, Raisa, change costumes and wigs in full view as their characters age over the course of the show.  And Russian Case was just the apex of a year in which I gorged on non-English-speaking theater.  It all started last spring, when major companies scrambled to put catalog productions online as soon as their venues shut down -- many of them stuck to traditional curtain times and eschewed on-demand, which meant appointment matinees for American viewers.  Suddenly, it became easier to see work by directors we have come to know over the years. Berlin's Schaubühne dug into its archive for full-length shows, including a healthy selection from the artistic director Thomas Ostermeier -- a treat for those of us who have loyally trekked to St. Ann's Warehouse and the Brooklyn Academy of Music for his live productions. As of this writing, the prestigious Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe in Paris was still streaming a subtitled capture of a contemporary take on Molière's ''The School for Wives.''  The most ambitious institution may well have been the Comédie-Française, also in Paris, which started by offering a slew of weekly archival captures (without subtitles) in the spring of 2020. I was finally able to see the 1974 production of Jean Giraudoux's ''Ondine'' that starred a teenage Isabelle Adjani and has attracted a cult following; I laughed alone in front of my computer watching a zippy staging of the Feydeau farce ''Le Système Ribadier.''  The Comédie-Française's virtual programming has evolved over the past year as regulations changed, and this 341-year-old grande dame has exhibited enviable verve. When in-person rehearsals were authorized again, the company put its troupe to great use with new initiatives like the table read series ''Théâtre à la Table,'' which has become increasingly sophisticated (and will remain on YouTube, unlike the full captures).  Those familiar with ''The Seagull'' could be tempted by the Comédie-Française's dynamic reading, led by Guillaume Gallienne as Trigorin and Elsa Lepoivre as Arkadina (they also played the terrible lovers Friedrich and Sophie in ''The Damned'' at the Park Avenue Armory).  Choices of source material show inventiveness, too, as with a fantastic re-enactment of Delphine Seyrig's ''Sois Belle et Tais Toi'' (''Be Pretty and Shut Up''), a prescient feminist documentary from 1981 in which actresses including Ellen Burstyn, Maria Schneider and Jane Fonda talked about sexism in the film industry.  Other companies have taken to appointment, blink-and-you-miss-it livestreaming, most notably Internationaal Theater Amsterdam -- the company led by van Hove, whose staging of ''The Things That Pass'' you can catch on April 25.  Not long before my Russian immersion, I was on the edge of my, er, couch during the British director Robert Icke's take on ''Oedipus'' for the Amsterdam theater. Even though there was no doubt as to the outcome, the modern-dress production had the intensity of a thriller and I caught myself yelping ''no no no no no'' out loud as the characters headed toward their fate like asteroids pulled into a black hole by an irresistible gravitational force.  There have even been actual online festivals such as ''Stories From Europe,'' which presented subtitled captures from members of the theater network mitos21. For a few days in January, we could pretend we were at the Berliner Ensemble, Moscow's Theater of Nations or the Teatro Stabile Torino. In dark wintertime, that escape felt precious, a window onto a world of possibilities rather than restrictions.  In an article for The Times recounting that trip to the Soviet Union in 1973, the Arena Stage associate director Alan Schneider quoted an account in the Literaturnaya Gazeta newspaper. ''Truly,'' it said, ''the exchange of theater experience, of theater groups, is one of the finest proofs of the willingness of peoples to live in peace, to seek mutual understanding.''  If that understanding must happen online for now, so be it. The glass, at least, is half full.  Top, from ''We Are All Here,'' a production inspired by ''Our Town.'' Top right, Yevgeny Mironov, left, and Chulpan Khamatova in ''Gorbachev.'' Above, the Comédie-Française's reading of ''The Seagull,'' part of a series that is available on YouTube. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SCHOOL OF MODERN PLAY THEATER, MOSCOW; IRA POLYARNAYA, VIA THEATER OF NATIONS, MOSCOW; THÉÂTRE À LA TABLE)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006p "
155		"    Dia 2.0: Facing the Future  By Randy Kennedy  1,918 words 25 April 2021   13     Jessica Morgan moves the art foundation beyond the sometimes swaggering heart of its Minimalist collection.  In 1988, the Dia Art Foundation hosted one of the most momentous readings in postwar art history -- the reclusive poet James Schuyler appeared before an audience for the first time in memory, occasioning a line down Mercer Street to the foundation's SoHo headquarters. One particularly lovely turn in Schuyler's poem ''Empathy and New Year'' elicited a hum of admiration from the crowd: ''Not knowing a name for something proves nothing.''  The sentiment could have been written as a maxim for Dia itself. What was this unusual, diffused, at times unstable art organization, exactly, and did it matter if no name quite suited?  Founded in Manhattan in 1974 by the art dealer Heiner Friedrich, his wife, Philippa de Menil, an heir to the Schlumberger oil-field company, and the art historian Helen Winkler, it has never operated like a museum by any conventional measure. It didn't have a central location to display its collection for nearly three decades, until opening Dia Beacon in a vast former box factory along the Hudson in 2003. Before Beacon and since, around the American West, Europe, Long Island, New England and Manhattan, it has maintained numerous discrete sites, several of which came and went along with the foundation's changeable fortunes and leadership.  At various times, it held stakes in a hilltop castle, an extinct volcanic crater, a defunct Army base and a Sufi mosque -- unorthodox homes, to say the least, for a core of work from the 1960s and 1970s that was rooted in Minimalism and Conceptualism but branched off in curious ways that had little to do with either.  Now, after decades of unrealized plans to find or build a new home in Manhattan, the foundation has opened a central hub on West 22nd Street in Chelsea that knits three of its existing industrial buildings into one of the largest single spaces Dia has ever had in the city.  The rough-hewed galleries -- to be used for long-term exhibitions, often of commissioned work by younger artists -- represent a homecoming, in a sense, for a place the foundation never really left. But its now-you-see-it-now-you-don't existence over so many years blurred awareness, by even informed art lovers, that Dia consists of substantially more than a popular blue-chip collection in the Hudson Valley.  ''We'd lost an audience, lost relevance, lost a connection to the city by not being open in New York for so long and just having Beacon,'' said Jessica Morgan, who took over as director six years ago and quickly scrapped a $50 million plan to build a new multistory home in Chelsea, one of several architectural visions that pushed the foundation's fund-raising ability past its limits.  Beyond money, the project ran counter to Dia's very temperament. It has never built from scratch. It has instead supported immense land art pieces conceived beyond the bounds of the built world. And in cities it has always recycled existing buildings, melding their industrial contours with work created in just such spaces, by artists like Donald Judd, Walter de Maria and Richard Serra.  The foundation used those buildings to provide work, by museum standards, with untold space and viewing durations that were unusually long or even permanent. Friedrich, who cast himself and Dia's founders as modern Medicis, likened this philosophy to the almost spiritual certitude that Giotto's frescoes will always be there in Padua when you step into the Scrovegni Chapel.  Over the last several years, the foundation and Morgan have been quietly at work less on construction -- the Chelsea site, even with a sleek new bookstore, is notable mostly for a studied inconspicuousness -- than on figuring out how to re-engineer Dia's tightly-bounded ethos to keep it vital in an art world now moving steadily beyond the mostly white, mostly male, sometimes swaggering heart of its founding collection.  In only the last two years, it added the first works by African-American artists -- the conceptualist Charles Gaines and the painter Sam Gilliam -- to its permanent holdings, with plans for major presences by the painter Jack Whitten, the sculptor Melvin Edwards and the sculptor and performance artist Senga Nengudi over the next three years. The Detroit techno producer Carl Craig 's hit sound-and-light installation ''Party/After-Party'' was the most visible example of the change afoot when Dia Beacon reopened from lockdown last summer. Since 2015, the foundation has also added work by 13 women, so that of 57 artists in the collection, 19 are now women. (The first substantial body of work by a woman, the painter Agnes Martin, didn't enter the collection until 2002.)  ''There was a barometer at Dia of what I call muscularity, '' said Dorothea Rockburne, whose mathematical, sometimes ephemeral work was acquired in 2018 and given spacious, overdue galleries at Beacon among peers like John Chamberlain and Robert Ryman.  ''That barometer sucked, to be blunt, and the situation is only very grudgingly changing,'' said Rockburne, 88, who added: ''Heiner Friedrich had a great eye. Sexist, but a great eye.''  Friedrich, in a recent interview at one of the foundation's many scattered sites, the Dan Flavin Art Institute in Bridgehampton, N.Y., said that the art world in which his sensibility was formed was overwhelmingly male and that he was generally pleased to see the canon he helped establish being widened. But he said he continued to believe that ''artworks speak for themselves'' and that additions to complement and extend Dia's history should not be chosen based primarily on whether work was made ''by a woman or a man, or someone of black color, red color, green color.''  Friedrich, 83, who has not been directly involved with the foundation since a coup over faltering finances in 1985, added that he applauded Morgan's decision to concentrate on art and artists over building. But he said he felt that the foundation, to remain fully true to itself, still needed to establish permanent Manhattan sites for displays of iconic works from the collection, like Andy Warhol's ''Shadows'' series, on view in Beacon; the German painter Blinky Palermo's grand syncopated painting suite ''To the People of New York City''; and ''Dream House,'' the immersive sound and light environment by La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela.  ''Worldwide, everything is changing exhibits,'' he said. ''Changing events. Changing everything. What is completely misunderstood is that certain works of art must have lasting presence. If you see them over time, they change your presence.''  Such a commitment to single bodies of art by a relatively small group of artists is not only financially arduous in New York but also swims against the contemporary tide, as museums work to keep their collections in evermore dynamic rotation and tell multiple, overlapping stories of art's history.  ''Even decades ago, it didn't quite compute,'' said Donna De Salvo, a veteran curator who worked for Dia in the tumultuous 1980s and returned in 2019. ''Part of my job back then was to try to find places to show parts of the collection we couldn't show. I'd ask museum directors for a minimum six-month commitment. They'd say, 'Wow. What a great idea! But who has enough real estate to give one artist that much time?' ''  Gilliam, 87, who had early success but whose work, like that of many Black artists of his day, was substantially overlooked for decades, said being given a signature presence at Beacon was akin to seeing work over time in his studio, ''which is like your instrument and where there's no place you're happier being, if you're a real artist.''  ''I saw a lot of my paintings for a long time because no one wanted them,'' Gilliam said. ''The day I walked into Dia and saw the rooms where the work of mine was going to be was one of the best days of my life. It's that kind of place, where you feel like you're part of a continuity.''  Lucy Raven, a multimedia artist, has been at work for the last three years with Dia curators to inaugurate the Chelsea space with two new works, a kinetic light sculpture and a film about the destructive transformation of rocks into concrete, a kind of inverse land-art piece.  ''Having moved here from Arizona, Dia was striking for me because it was in the city but on the other hand it was supporting all this monumental art work out West,'' Raven, 44, said. ''At the time I got to know it, it seemed like a kind of archival situation, not a place that was in the cards for a younger artist like me to be part of. But then you could see that was changing.''  She added: ''It certainly hasn't been lost on me that I've been working with a team almost entirely of women there now.''  Dia's curators have been working for years on the knotty calculus of determining which artists and works, like Raven's, make sense in the foundation's highly particular biome. Much of their time, Morgan said, has been directed toward ''thinking about who was not in the collection and why and let's move beyond the same tired history that we hear over and over again because we all know that there are different stories to tell.''  Artists and ideas on the horizon, possible but not yet set in stone, Morgan said, tend to lay further afield than Dia has ranged in the past: a project with the Indian artist Sheela Gowda, 64, in Bangalore; others with the Mexican writer and activist Valeria Luiselli, 37, and the Colombian artist Delcy Morelos, 53, whose practice in ceramic and clay speaks partly to her country's history of violence; and a permanent land-art site in Puerto Rico.  Morgan said her greatest hope for reopening in Chelsea is that it will make its strongest statement by declining to make an architectural statement.  ''This is the road we chose -- not to spend tons of money on something but to prioritize giving money to artists and to an endowment so that we can continue to do what we do best,'' she said. Especially now, as institutions around the world reel from the pandemic's financial blow, cutting programs and staff, she said she believed Dia's instinct to remain low to the ground was prescient. And lucky.  ''Money has often gone to the wrong place, I think, vanity projects for one person or another,'' she said. ''I don't know any artists who are really into those kinds of spaces. Do you?''  From top: Dan Flavin's ''the diagonal of May 25, 1963 (to Constantin Brancusi),'' a fluorescent light work at the newly renovated Dia Chelsea; Sam Gilliam's ''Double Merge'' (1968), Dia Beacon; Lucy Raven's ''Ready Mix'' (2021) at Dia Chelsea; and sculptures by John Chamberlain, shown in a long-term installation by Dia at 67 Vestry Street from 1982 to 1985. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN FLAVIN/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; ELIZABETH FELICELLA; SAM GILLIAM AND DIA ART FOUNDATION/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; BILL JACOBSON; LUCY RAVEN AND DIA ART FOUNDATION; BILL JACOBSON; FAIRWEATHER & FAIRWEATHER LTD./ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; DAN WALWORTH)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006n "
156		"    A Pregnant Pause, in Pandemic Time  By Gia Kourlas  2,446 words 25 April 2021   6     At the beginning of the pandemic, one of Megan Fairchild's former dance teachers gave her some advice: Now would be a really great time to get pregnant. Fairchild, a principal at New York City Ballet, was aghast.  ''I was like, that's a ridiculous idea and the last thing on my mind right now,'' she said. ''This is going to last a couple months, and I don't want to not be there when we get back.''  But as days turned into weeks and months, she began to experience another emotion: anger. It was clear that her kind of live performance, dancing for thousands at Lincoln Center, would not be resuming anytime soon. Fairchild, a planner, always wanted to give her young daughter a sibling so that she could experience a relationship like she has with her dancer-brother, Robbie Fairchild.  She did the math. The pandemic pause plus another pregnancy, if they didn't overlap, would add up to two-and-a-half years off the stage. ''It started to make me super mad about the fact that I have to take a full year off from my career -- my short career already -- as the woman in the parenting situation to bring a child into the world.''  For much of the pandemic year, Fairchild, 36, was pregnant -- with twins. (On April 10, she gave birth to two girls.) The decision to have another child came to her in three words when she was meditating: Do it now. ''I didn't think I was ready,'' she said, ''but the idea of just doing it now kind of solved all my problems.''  Now Fairchild is irritated that she wasted so much time. ''I wish I got pregnant in March!'' she said.  She's not the only one to have taken advantage of the theatrical shutdown. The dance world is experiencing a full-blown baby boom. ''This has just been something to lift us up and give us new energy,'' said Brittany Pollack, 32, a City Ballet soloist, who is expecting a girl in September with her husband, Jonathan Stafford, the company's artistic director.  A dance career is relatively short, and so is the window for a dancer to have a child. It usually happens later in a career when stage credits or time with a company is already established. So while the baby boom is a joyful outcome to a terrible situation, it also brings to light the real struggle that many dancers, particularly women, face in deciding whether and when to start a family.  ''It's like, the world's ending,'' Heather Lang, a cast member of ''Jagged Little Pill,'' said. ''Here you go, here's your chance.''  The pandemic has afforded dancers, including Lang, who had her second child during the shutdown, something rare: time -- to be away from performing and then to get back into dancing shape. ''I don't have to sacrifice another year of contemplating, should I stop now?'' said Erica Pereira, a soloist at City Ballet who is currently pregnant. ''Should I have the baby? It's like a blessing in disguise.''  The roster of new and expecting mothers bears this out: In recent weeks, Ingrid Silva of Dance Theater of Harlem; Teresa Reichlen of City Ballet; and Stephanie Williams and Zhong-Jing Fang of American Ballet Theater have had babies. Ballet Theater's Lauren Post, who has a young daughter, is pregnant with a boy.  Justin Peck, the resident choreographer and artistic adviser of City Ballet, and his wife, the dancer Patricia Delgado, welcomed a daughter on March 29. (And the phenomenon extends beyond New York; the Royal Ballet in London has also seen a baby boom.)  In addition to Lang, several Broadway dancers have had children in recent months: Ashley Blair Fitzgerald (''The Cher Show''), Khori Petinaud (''Moulin Rouge! The Musical'') and Lauren Yalango-Grant, who, at 34 weeks pregnant, was part of the cast of the coming film ''Tick, Tick ... Boom!'' Directed by Lin-Manuel Miranda, the movie features choreography by the forward-thinking Ryan Heffington.  ''They were supportive of me being pregnant, which I think was really awesome because I think generally women who work have a hard time with pregnancy,'' Yalango-Grant said. ''It's very hard to have a child and then manage coming back. And especially for performers and dancers, it's a struggle -- and we're not really set up for success.''  Dancers at Ballet Theater and City Ballet receive parental leave through their union contracts; the amount of paid time off varies per company, contract and the circumstances of the birth. Generally, on Broadway, performers get their spots saved -- unpaid -- for up to a year.  Petinaud had decided to have a child before the shutdown happened -- ''Moulin Rouge!'' seemed like a show that would last -- and while she was in great shape, she said, her body was also depleted from the Broadway schedule. ''It is really a challenge to make space and room for any sort of balance outside of your career when you're a dancer or performer,'' she said. ''You get a job and you're like, great -- I'm going to do that job. Because you don't know when the next thing is going to be. And that's usually to the detriment of your significant other, or missing weddings, funerals and babies.''  Even with help, it's hard. Lang, who has two children, knows that the support of her husband and family makes it all possible. A dancer's schedule -- fluctuating rehearsal schedules during the day, performances at night -- can make family time difficult. How sustainable is it to have a baby while balancing eight shows a week? What if a Broadway show had two casts or fewer shows?  Many hope the culture can change. ''The culture is fear, you know?'' Lang said. ''It's like, oh my God, I can't call out -- I'll lose my job.'' Dancers go along with that culture to hold onto roles. ''That, to me, has got to go,'' Lang added. ''I know it's rampant in the ballet world -- it's rampant everywhere.''  At the start of the pandemic, Reichlen, who is 36 years old and a principal at City Ballet, decided to take three months off dancing. She hadn't had a break in 20 years; then, when those three months were over, she found out she was pregnant. She tried to keep up her training, like others in the company, by dancing in her living room. ''To be perfectly honest, I hated that,'' she said. ''It's just terrible.''  At 5'9'', Reichlen said she didn't have enough space; if she fell, she might hit her head on the kitchen counter. And she started to feel the pregnancy. ''My body just felt weird,'' she said. ''And I was like, you know what? I think I'm done.''  Now that her son is born, she's grateful that she has had time to pace herself as she gets back into shape. But with or without a baby, the landscape of the company will have changed and that can't help but affect her dancing, too. ''What are the dynamics going to be like when we get back?'' she said. ''We haven't had just the pandemic. We've had all this social unrest, we've had the election. There's just been so much that's happened in the last year and then I also have a baby.''  With a laugh, Reichlen said, ''I mean, first of all, I'm just like, how do I get out of the house?''  All dancers will have to get back into fighting shape, but there are bigger challenges for new mothers. Pregnancy, of course, adds weight; it also changes the alignment of the body.  Kristin Sapienza, a doctor of physical therapy who has worked with dancers including Fairchild, said, ''The muscles in the pelvic floor are taking on a lot of pressure and being stretched out.'' Those muscles need to be recoordinated. And there is also the possibility of diastasis recti, ''when the rectus abdominal muscles actually split apart, and during pregnancy it's to make room for the baby,'' Sapienza said.  The linea alba, which runs down the midline of the abdomen and connects the muscles, is ''essentially like a piece of Saran Wrap, so you have to do the work to close that back up,'' Sapienza continued. ''For dancers, you need a solid core foundation to achieve the perfect movement at the perfect moment -- you need that core stability.''  Post, who dealt, she said, with postpartum mood disorder and depression after her first pregnancy, has been documenting her current one on Instagram to show that there are ups and downs. She said before having her first child, she was naïve and thought, ''Oh, I'll have a newborn, it's going to be magical and so sweet.'' The reality hit her hard. ''Your entire life changes overnight,'' she said, ''and all of a sudden I didn't have my job. I didn't have my friends in the way that I was used to. It's a whole physical and emotional toll that I think could be more supported.''  That first delivery was smooth and straightforward, Post said, so she was shocked at how hard it felt to come back. ''I don't think I did my first ballet barre until after three months postpartum,'' she said. ''And in my mind I was like, I'll be cleared for physical activity at six weeks, and I'll get back into a gentle barre, but no. I didn't feel ready. I know everyone's experience is different, but I just felt like my body and musculature had completely changed.''  Silva, a veteran of Dance Theater of Harlem, spent her entire pregnancy dancing -- her daughter was born on the Friday of her 39th week -- and she's eager to return, she said, ''but with a different understanding of my body and different feelings, different artistic moments.''  She added: ''After giving birth to a baby, you feel like you can conquer anything. I can't wait to be back onstage and see what's going to happen.''  Fang, too, knows that her daughter, Zia, will change not only how she dances but also her approach to artistry. ''My husband is African-American, and now there is the Stop Asian Hate movement and I'm of Chinese heritage,'' Fang, 37, said. ''How are we going to raise Zia as a biracial child for this generation? What is my responsibility as a dancer myself to this new role as a mother?''  As an artist, she said, that responsibility is to convey the truth in an honest and graceful way. ''I view my role as a mother in this same light,'' she said. ''In the classical ballet stories, there is always light and darkness. It will be important for Zia to understand that this is also the way of the world. As a dancer and choreographer, I love conveying that darkness is always overtaken by light. And that's what I'm going to teach my daughter.''  In having someone else to take care of, a dancer's performance quality can change. Watching dancers who have recently had children can be a thrill: The stage is their time to be alone, and they're not about to squander it. They live it. Stafford has noticed that dancers often come back as better artists after having a child. ''Maybe that extra human being in your life just brings out something in you that wouldn't come out otherwise in your artistry onstage,'' he said, adding of Fairchild: ''I mean Megan danced the best she's ever danced since coming back from her first child.''  And she is ready to do so again. But she didn't have an easy time with her second pregnancy; at 26 weeks, she started to have preterm labor concerns. Doctors watch women pregnant with twins like a hawk, Fairchild said. She was forced to rest, to lie down on the couch ''for as many hours a day as possible,'' she said. ''For a dancer, it feels disgusting. I feel gross.''  That was in mid-March. At the start of April, when Fairchild was 35 weeks pregnant, we spoke again after she, her husband and their daughter contracted the coronavirus.  ''We got Covid from my daughter's day care and it was the one risk that we decided to take because I needed to rest,'' she said.  Since the babies were fully developed, Fairchild said she was never worried about them. But it was rough. She also contracted strep throat, and she developed severe acid reflux. ''I had mucus going down, acid going up and then the throat pain,'' she said. ''I've never been so miserable. And on top of it, what am I? Thirty-eight pounds heavier than normal?''  She scowled, adding, ''I can't even roll over in bed easily.''  No, Fairchild has never cared for being pregnant. (Her word for it is horrible.) But she was ready for the commotion to start. As she likes to wisecrack, she will have enough daughters to cast as the muses in George Balanchine's ''Apollo.''  ''It's going to be a loud household, and that's what I wanted,'' she said. ''Before we got pregnant the first time, I said to my husband, 'It's too quiet in our house.' I want life. I want someone to come wake us up in the morning and crawl into bed. And so it's going to be this wild party. I hate, hate being alone. I'll probably never be alone again for a really long time.''  ''I didn't think I was ready,'' said Megan Fairchild, with daughter Tullie early this month. ''But the idea of just doing it now kind of solved all my problems.'' Below, Fairchild returned to the barre two months postpartum in 2019, and three months later she was cuddling Tullie after performing at Kennedy Center. (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA MEGAN FAIRCHILD) (AR6-AR7); Khori Petinaud, a dancer in ''Moulin Rouge! The Musical,'' and Wayne Kenneth Petinaud Jr. with their son, Carver, in Brooklyn Bridge Park, and at home, right. Below, Zhong-Jing Fang, with her baby, Zia, believes her artistry will inform her parenting: ''As a dancer and choreographer, I love conveying that darkness is always overtaken by light. And that's what I'm going to teach my daughter.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARIDELIS MORALES ROSADO FOR THE new_york_times) (AR7)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006j "
157		"   Money and U We're All Crypto People Now, for Better or Worse  By Erin Griffith  2,191 words 25 April 2021   1     SAN FRANCISCO -- On Monday evening, a few days after a large cryptocurrency exchange listed its shares on the stock market, several hundred women gathered in a virtual conference room to talk about Bitcoin. Claire Wasserman, a co-founder of Ladies Get Paid, the company that co-hosted the event, marveled at the turnout, noting it showed ''how committed you all are to getting wealthy.'' She described a sweeping change in the way we live, work and transact -- all driven by crypto. ''I don't want you to miss out on the future,'' she said.  Attendees lit up the comments section to talk digital currency. One woman said she started investing after posing as a man in online forums for pickup artists.  ''It was very YUCK,'' she wrote, ''but I learned a lot.''  Another said she'd been funneling her shopping budget into crypto during the pandemic, doubling her money since November.  A panel of talking heads encouraged the women to buy and hold Bitcoin as an investment -- even just $5 or $25. They offered advice on security, privacy, taxes and digital wallets. And they pitched crypto start-ups as places to find promising career opportunities that could, frankly, use more women.  ''And ladies, if you're single, I promise you this is a great place to be,'' joked Bitcoin Frankie, a cryptocurrency influencer. The event ended with cries of ''dismantle the financial patriarchy!'' and a plug for an upcoming Ladies Get Paid session on nonfungible tokens, or NFTs, a form of crypto-fied digital art.  It was the kind of conversation happening in group texts, Twitter threads, Zoom rooms and Clubhouse panels across the country as the once-niche world of digital currencies has invaded the mainstream via art, sports, entertainment and media. In the process, Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies have gone from curiosity to punchline to viable investment. They have made a lot of people very rich -- making the entire category harder than ever to ignore.  The result? Dogecoin, a joke currency based on a meme about a Shiba Inu, is a hot topic on CNBC. Coinbase, a crypto exchange, is now a publicly listed company worth $58 billion. WeWork plans to accept crypto for rent. Wall Street banks are offering digital currency funds to their high net worth clients. There is a blockchain class for kids. The following items can be bought and sold as NFTs: an album by Kings of Leon, some pictures of Rob Gronkowski playing football, digital horses for breeding and racing, virtual sneakers, a recording of farts, a tattoo on Croatian tennis player Oleksandra Oliynykova's arm, that meme of a photobombing seal, the world's most colorful color, the scientist George Church's genome, U.S. Patent No. 10,025,797, the word ''porn,'' and somehow, a house. And Lindsay Lohan keeps tweeting about Bitcoin.  It's all part of our wild new YOLO FOMO LOL economy, where stonks only go up, memes count as financial advice and stimmies buy Hemis. It's not particularly rational, but neither is a year of pandemic isolation and burnout, a money-printing Fed and a K-shaped recovery with the potential new Roaring '20s on the horizon.  All the while, the true believers and veterans of the 12-year-old digital currency industry insist that the underlying tech is real and transformative and finally -- finally! -- ready to upend nothing less than the global financial system and internet as we know it.  Everyone seems to be getting rich or selling a token or predicting a revolution. Digital currencies are volatile, risky and prone to bubbles; countless fortunes have already been made and lost. In some cases, many people are already using blockchains -- the underlying technology of cryptocurrencies -- without realizing it or understanding how, exactly, they work.  ''Bitcoin mania is not a fad,'' Daniel Ives, an equities analyst at Wedbush Securities, wrote in a recent note to clients, ''but rather the start of a new age on the digital currency front.''  Short of that, cryptocurrency is, at the very least, now seen as a good place to park some cash. Everyone has read the stories of teenage crypto millionaires -- or the pizza bought with Bitcoin that would now be worth millions. To not get involved is, in crypto-speak, to ''have fun staying poor.'' In other words: We are all crypto people now. Gulp.  'Is this a bad dream?'  It's hard to sit by, watching our index funds and 401(k)s passively, predictably, responsibly tick upward, while an art-world outsider named Beeple sells an NFT of a digital collage for $69 million. For many, news of this transaction raised a simple question: Why not me?  Mark Greenberg, a photographer, had that thought in March when he auctioned off an NFT of a previously unpublished portrait he'd taken of Andy Warhol in 1985. Watching the bids climb to $100,000, he was elated. He hadn't been able to work much in the pandemic, and this money could help with his daughter's upcoming wedding and the house he'd just bought. But then he started to worry.  His sale's bounty was stored in a digital account that only he had access to. What would happen to it if he, a 69-year-old with some health issues, suddenly dropped dead?  As a precaution, he added his goddaughter's thumbprint to his phone's security. That turned out to be ''a hideous, painful mistake,'' he said, because it triggered security measures and permanently disabled his cryptocurrency accounts. (Mr. Greenberg, a crypto newbie, had not saved the crucial ''seed phrase'' that could get him back in.)  His joy from the sale quickly turned to horror. ''My head started to get vibrate-y,'' he said. ''I thought, 'Is this a bad dream?'''  Lost cryptocurrency, he learned, is gone for good. Adding insult to injury, Mr. Greenberg's inaccessible account receives a royalty payment every time his NFT is resold.  NFT sales have also had issues with impersonation, faked transactions, tokens not being delivered, glitchy auction websites and sellers struggling to cash out their payments. There are concerns over the energy consumed in such transactions, along with how to preserve access to crypto art that is hosted on sites that could go out of business. It's a new industry, and many expect the initial burst of excitement to fade.  ''It's clear we're in some type of NFT bubble,'' Nick Tomaino, the founder of 1confirmation, a cryptocurrency-focused fund. But he also sees the phenomenon as a tipping point. ''A bubble is a sign that the trend is real.''  Despite the heartburn from his disappearing windfall, Mr. Greenberg remains enthusiastic about NFTs. He made plans to auction off several more images and has set up a new account -- greenielostkey.  'I pretty much went all-in.'  On April 14, Coinbase listed its shares on the stock market, ushering cryptocurrency into the mainstream. Early believers basked in the validation.  Marc P. Bernegger bought some Bitcoin at $7 in 2012 and handed out many of the coins to friends. He had tried to explain that the technology's potential went far beyond the currency, but ''most of them didn't really care,'' he said.  Few of them can access the coins. Neither can he. Not viewing it as an investment at the time, he spent it on issues of Bitcoin magazine and a betting game called Satoshi Dice, selling the rest at $30.  Earlier this month, the price of a single Bitcoin topped $63,000.  Now Mr. Bernegger is an investor at Crypto Finance Group, a brokerage and asset manager in Switzerland, and friends seek out his advice on crypto investments. He tells them to buy and hold for the long term and to ignore volatility along the way.  ''I always tell my friends, 'If you really believe in it, buy it for your kids,''' he said.  Since last week, the price of Bitcoin has fallen by more than 20 percent as of Saturday. There's an industry term for white-knuckling it through crypto's wild volatility without selling: ''hodl.''  But even those with the stomach for hodling must avoid an even bigger issue -- hacking. Many crypto thieves use SIM swapping -- a technique to gain access to a phone number by switching service to a different SIM card -- to take over accounts and empty them.  As Coinbase went public, some customers whose accounts have been hacked or otherwise locked complained that the company has ignored their pleas for help. (Coinbase said it has added more customer support workers in recent months.) Pervasive hacking, the volume of lost crypto and the lack of customer service paint a picture of an industry that is not yet ready for mainstream users.  People are piling in anyway. Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley have announced plans to offer access to crypto funds to assuage wealthy customers that have been clamoring to buy in. PayPal and Venmo added crypto trading and shopping features, while the brokerage app Robinhood put out an announcement to remind people it had crypto trading, too.  Bitcoin Frankie, the influencer, was drawn to crypto trading last year after the pandemic wiped out her event staffing agency overnight. When she pulled up an old digital wallet she'd forgotten about, she was surprised at how much it had grown in value. So she started studying and buying digital currency and talking about it on social media.  ''I pretty much went all-in,'' she said. Her events business is starting to rebound, but she's not sure she wants to return to that life. Crypto companies are hiring her to promote their projects and she has an idea for a crypto start-up.  ''The community just feels so passionate,'' she said. ''A lot of people find it for the investment, but then they stay because they realize this is the new internet.''  Still a believer.  Jered Kenna was a true believer. When he got into Bitcoin in 2009, he became excited about its potential for sending money cheaply around the world and expanding access to banking services.  In 2012 he opened 20Mission, a 40-room Bitcoin ''hacker hotel'' in an vacant S.R.O. in San Francisco's Mission district with the goal of collaborating on and fostering new crypto projects. The early days included a crypto store, a co-working space and parties on an AstroTurf roof. In the basement, Mr. Kenna's friend, Onder Keskin, runs a leather goods business that is popular with San Francisco's fetish community.  ''No one was talking about how to get rich off of this,'' Mr. Kenna said.  Over the past few years, the influx of money-seeking hustlers and useless cultural absurdities have soured him on the broader industry. Too many projects are using blockchain technology when a simple database would suffice, he said, and he's not a fan of NFT art because it seems like a fad. He's seen friends from the early days get unfathomably rich and lose touch with reality. He also experienced a staggering loss in 2016, when his identity was stolen and almost all of his accounts were hacked.  Now, even as crypto is booming, 20Mission is only half occupied. When the pandemic hit, its techie residents fled to Austin, Miami and Portland, Ore. On a recent visit, the corridors, painted with brightly colored murals, were quiet. Several giant beanbags and old futons lay in a pile in the co-op's dusty common room.  Mr. Kenna said he sometimes regretted not trying to make money on 20Mission over the years. It could have given his other businesses, a brewery and Spanish-language school in Colombia, a cushion in the pandemic.  That will soon change. In early May, Mr. Kenna plans to auction off digital tokens that represent ownership in each of his hacker house's unoccupied rooms. The buyers of the tokens will get 75-year leases with rent of $1 a month. It will be, as far as he knows, the first NFT for housing.  He sees the plan as a way to give more people access to homeownership, still believing -- deep down, in spite of all the hype and money -- that cryptocurrency can have a positive impact on the world.  He also thinks the auction could have a positive impact on day-to-day life at 20Mission, mitigating some of the messiness that comes with communal living. If the hacker hostel's residents are financially invested in the future of the community, they might be more likely to do the dishes.  Top, Bitcoin Frankie is a content creator for crypto companies. Center, there's an industry term for white-knuckling it through crypto's wild volatility without selling: ''hodl.'' Above, the owner of 20Mission, a Bitcoin ''hacker hotel'' in San Francisco, has soured on the broader crypto industry but believes cryptocurrency can still have a positive impact. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ILANA PANICH-LINSMAN FOR THE new_york_times; JIM WILSON/THE new_york_times) (BU8)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006m "
158		"    When Co-Stars Are Up for the Same Oscar  By Ben Zauzmer  1,281 words 25 April 2021   12     Daniel Kaluuya and Lakeith Stanfield of ''Judas and the Black Messiah'' are going head-to-head for best supporting actor. Here's how they might fare.  When the Academy Award nominations were unveiled last month, the news that Lakeith Stanfield, seemingly the lead actor in ''Judas and the Black Messiah,'' was up for best supporting actor puzzled many of us, including Stanfield himself. He wrote on Instagram, ''I'm confused too,'' adding, ''lmao.'' Warner Bros. campaigned for Stanfield in the best actor category, but academy voters treat that as a mere suggestion, not a mandate.  This categorization pits Stanfield directly against his ''Judas'' co-star Daniel Kaluuya, the 20th time a film has scored multiple nominations for supporting actor. But does the fact that Stanfield's role is arguably bigger than Kaluuya's give him a leg up in the Oscar race?  The data from past Oscars can shed some light on this question -- not just from the previous 19 times that two co-stars have appeared on the supporting actor list, but all 71 times it has happened in any acting category. In 48 of those instances, none of the nominees won the award, so they don't help answer the question of whether bigger parts have an advantage. But the other 23 offer some insight.  Instances in which an actor or actress beat out a fellow cast member from the same film for an Oscar are not evenly distributed across categories. It has happened only six times in the supporting actor category, a dozen times with supporting actress and four times with best actor. Rarest of all is a best actress showdown between co-stars: Shirley MacLaine's win over her ''Terms of Endearment'' colleague Debra Winger in 1984 remains the only time one lead actress from a film has topped another from that same film at the Academy Awards. (Incidentally, ''Terms of Endearment'' is also the only film on this list twice, as Jack Nicholson edged out John Lithgow for best supporting actor).  One film even managed to win an acting category in which it had three of the five nominations: ''The Godfather Part II'' (1974) provided a best supporting actor platform for Robert De Niro, who beat out fellow mobsters played by Michael V. Gazzo and Lee Strasberg.  To analyze whether the bigger part won, we first need to define the bigger part. There is no entirely objective way to do this, but one method is to look at billing order in the credits, on the assumption that bigger roles are often listed first.  Historically, the highest-billed actors won 17 of 23 matchups over their lower billed co-stars. If this suggests an academy preference for higher-billed actors, that's a good sign for Kaluuya, whose name appears above Stanfield's in the closing credits. But the very fact that Kaluuya appears ahead of Stanfield, arguably the movie's primary character, is evidence that this method is not a perfect proxy for estimating an actor's significance in a film.  Across all 168 supporting actor and actress races in Oscar history, 23 percent of nominees who were higher billed in their films than their four competitors won the category, while all other nominees sit at 18 percent. It's not an enormous gap, but one that might suggest a slight voter preference for bigger roles. That too would favor Kaluuya, who could join Don Ameche (''Cocoon,'' 1985); George Clooney (''Syriana,'' 2005); and Patricia Arquette (''Boyhood,'' 2014) as the only supporting winners to receive top billing in their films.  In this year's supporting actress race, it's not clear who would receive that advantage: Maria Bakalova (''Borat Subsequent Moviefilm''), Glenn Close (''Hillbilly Elegy''), Olivia Colman (''The Father'') and Amanda Seyfried (''Mank'') all get second billing in their movies. Yet all four might fall to Yuh-Jung Youn, whose name appears sixth in the opening of ''Minari.''  Indeed, the adage that ''there are no small parts, only small actors'' holds true on numerous occasions. Mahershala Ali received ninth billing in ''Moonlight'' (2016) yet won best supporting actor, the record for lowest billing to win this category. For supporting actress, that record is eighth-billed, shared by Gale Sondergaard (the very first winner in this category, for the 1936 epic drama ''Anthony Adverse'') and Hattie McDaniel (who made history as the first Black Oscar winner, for ''Gone With the Wind,'' in 1940).  Another method of determining whether the size of the part matters to Oscar voters involves measuring how long they appear in their movies. Matthew Stewart of screentimecentral.com has performed the formidable task of watching every Oscar-nominated performance and keeping track of their screen time. From Stewart's data, the actor with the most screen time has beaten out a co-star in 15 out of 23 races. The record is even better if we look solely at the supporting categories: 14 out of 18.  Bing Crosby's victory over Barry Fitzgerald (both lead nominees for ''Going My Way,'' 1944) is the only example where less screen time won the best actor trophy. But fans of Fitzgerald's performance as a kindly elder pastor can rest assured: He too walked away with an award. Strangely, the academy handed him the best supporting actor title, the only instance in history of an actor being nominated twice for a single performance, prompting the academy to change the rules to prevent this from happening again.  The average screen time for the 23 winners who bested their co-stars is 34:57. For the 24 losers (including two from ''The Godfather Part II''), it's only 25:32. This does suggest that the academy leans toward honoring bigger parts when co-stars are up against each other.  While that's illustrative of the past, it's not a particularly useful barometer in predicting this year's outcome. Stanfield clocks in at 49:51, while Kaluuya is onscreen for 46:09; the gap is hardly meaningful.  This analysis views Kaluuya and Stanfield as rivals, just like their onscreen characters. But in some respects, their Oscar fates are tied together. If the Oscars were decided by random chance, the 71 instances of films with multiple nominations in one acting category would produce 29.4 winners; instead we saw that the actual result is 23 winners, implying some amount of vote-splitting or another bias against films with multiple nominations.  The other three supporting actor contenders this year -- Sacha Baron Cohen (''The Trial of the Chicago 7''), Leslie Odom Jr. (''One Night in Miami'') and Paul Raci (''Sound of Metal'') -- probably hope for some vote-splitting. Right now, Kaluuya is in pole position, with wins from the Golden Globes, Screen Actors Guild and BAFTAs, among others. But Stanfield wasn't nominated for those honors.  At the Oscars, voters will face a choice: to bypass both for another of the hopefuls, go with the Black Panther Party state leader or opt for the F.B.I. informant who betrayed him.  Ben Zauzmer is the author of ''Oscarmetrics: The Math Behind the Biggest Night in Hollywood.''  Top, Daniel Kaluuya, center background, and Lakeith Stanfield, center foreground, are both nominated for best supporting actor for their work in ''Judas and the Black Messiah,'' the 20th time one film has achieved multiple nominees in that category. Rarer still is a best actress showdown: In 1984, the co-stars of ''Terms of Endearment'' -- Shirley MacLaine, above with Jack Nicholson, and Debra Winger, left with Huckleberry Fox -- faced off, with MacLaine taking the Oscar. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WARNER BROS.; PARAMOUNT PICTURES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006k "
159		"   House & Home/ The New Essentials: A Weekend Trip  652 words 25 April 2021   7     For the vaccinated, the feeling is palpable: It's time to get out of town. Whether you're flying to see family or just making a weekend escape to the country, these items (from a weekend duffel bag to a sophisticated laptop sleeve) will make traveling easier.  Best Tote Bag  Baggu Duck Bag  The Baggu Duck Bag is a casual, durable and comfortable tote bag that comes in a variety of colors. It is 11 inches wide by nearly 16 inches tall, and its flexible seams mean it can accommodate a lot. The shoulder strap extends to 40 inches, double the strap length of most totes, and you can adjust it to use the bag over your shoulder or carry it on your back. You can use the short handles to carry it like a briefcase. $34 from baggu.com  Best Laptop Sleeve  Daily Edited Sleeve  The Daily Edited sleeve has a more refined look than most laptop sleeves. Its stiff saffiano leather not only withstands bumps, nicks and water, but also has an eye-catching texture, especially when paired with a smooth zipper (which comes in silver or gold colors). The 13-inch sleeve perfectly fits most 13-inch laptops, including non-MacBooks, so your computer won't bounce around inside the sleeve as you travel. And yet, even though the fit is snug, you won't have trouble opening the sleeve to retrieve your computer. $140 from thedailyedited.com  Best Weekender  Lands' End Waxed Canvas Duffel Bag  This Lands' End duffel is the toughest bag you can find -- it's made of sturdy canvas, with leather trim and brass hardware -- that is also consistently in stock. The shoulder strap comes off, which is useful if you prefer to carry your bag by its handle. A small internal pocket is convenient for your wallet or house keys. The waxed duffel is also more casual. It's not the bag you'd take on a business trip but to a cabin in the mountains. That look has practical benefits. With a little care, this duffel should last a long time, and the Lands' End lifetime warranty has you covered in any case. $160 from landsend.com  Best Tech Organizer  Incase Nylon Accessory Organizer  The Incase Nylon Accessory Organizer has plenty of room for everyday electronic gear, zips closed and is water-repellent. It is roughly the size and shape of a large paperback and, like a book, it opens flat from a spine. At two inches thick, it's among the slimmest accessory organizers, but it can hold everything you need. The best part is the external zip pocket with a cable-size hole leading to the bag's interior, which lets you charge a phone without removing the external battery pack from the main compartment. It also has a large pocket lined in faux fur to protect delicate phone screens. $48 from amazon.com  Best Toiletries Bag  State Bags Bensen Dopp Kit  This dopp kit is a good option for travelers who need one that can hold enough for longer excursions as well as keep smaller, travel-size items organized. The bag unzips flat like a textbook (it is 7 inches by 9 inches by 3 inches) instead of opening at the top, so it can stash larger and wider items, like a full-size shampoo bottle or shaving cream canister. It also has a hook, so it can hang from a towel rack. Even stuffed full of toiletries, the main compartment's seams do not pucker, and the bag is still easy to zip closed. It also contains a removable plastic pouch that can hold up to four 2.7-ounce travel bottles and unsnaps to use by itself. $50 from statebags.com  This list is adapted from Wirecutter, the new_york_times company that reviews and recommends products.  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006g "
160		"    For British Star, Many Tears Gone By  By Lindsay Zoladz  2,315 words 25 April 2021   9     The British musician has had several brushes with death in her 74 years. But Covid-19 and its long-haul symptoms didn't derail her latest project: a spoken-word tribute to the Romantic poets.  Several times in her 74 years of life, Marianne Faithfull has boomeranged from the brink of death.  First there was the summer of 1969, when she overdosed on Tuinal sleeping pills in the Sydney hotel room she was sharing with her then-boyfriend, Mick Jagger; as she slipped under, she had a long conversation with his recently deceased bandmate, Brian Jones, who had drowned in a swimming pool about a week prior. At the end of their spirited talk, Jones beckoned her to hop off a cliff and join him in the beyond. Faithfull declined, and woke up from a six-day coma.  That was before she became addicted to heroin in the early 1970s: ''At that point I entered one of the outer levels of hell,'' she writes in her 1994 autobiography ''Faithfull.'' It took more than a decade to finally get clean. Since then she's survived breast cancer, hepatitis C and an infection resulting from a broken hip. But, as Faithfull told me on the phone from her London home one afternoon in February, her recent bout with Covid-19 and its lingering long-term aftereffects has been the hardest battle she's fought in her entire life.  ''You don't want to get this, darling,'' she said. ''Really.''  She said it, of course, in That Voice, coated with ash but flickering with lively defiance underneath. As it's matured -- cracked and ripened like a well-journeyed face -- Faithfull's voice has come to possess a transfixing magic. It's a voice that sounds like it has come back from somewhere, and found a way to collapse present and past. She can find the Weimar Berlin decadence in Dylan, or breathe William Blake's macabre into a Metallica song.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Right before she contracted the virus in March 2020, Faithfull was working on an album she'd dreamed of making for more than half a century: ''She Walks in Beauty,'' due April 30, a spoken-word tribute to the Romantic poets, who had first inflamed her imagination as a teenager. In the mid-1960s, the demands of Faithfull's burgeoning pop career pulled her out of her beloved Mrs. Simpson's English literature course, ''but I went on reading the books,'' Faithfull said. And through the ups and downs of her life, those poems stayed with her like well-worn talismans: ''If you've ever read 'Ode to a Nightingale,' 'The Lady of Shalott' -- you're not going to forget it, are you?''  Faithfull had recorded recitations of seven Romantic poems, from Byron (''She Walks in Beauty''), Shelley (''Ozymandias'') and Keats (''Ode to a Nightingale''). After she was hospitalized with Covid-19 and fell into a coma, her manager sent the recordings to Faithfull's friend and frequent collaborator Warren Ellis, to see if he would compose music to accompany them. Neither was sure Faithfull would live to hear the finished product.  Ellis was told, '''It's not looking good,''' he recalled, on a video call from his Paris home. '''This might be it.'''  But -- ever the Lady Lazarus -- Faithfull pulled through. Only once she began to recover did her son, Nicholas, tell her what they'd written on the chart at the foot of her bed: ''Palliative care only.''  ''They thought I was going to croak!'' Faithfull said, likely for not the first time in her life.  ''But,'' she added with a wizened chuckle, ''I didn't.''  MARIANNE'S FATHER, Glynn Faithfull -- yes, that improbably perfect surname is real -- was a British spy in World War II, and the son of a sexologist who invented something called ''the Frigidity Machine.'' Her mother, just as improbably, was the Austrian Baroness Eva von Sacher-Masoch -- the great-niece of the man who wrote the sensationally scandalous novella ''Venus in Furs'' and from whose name we are blessed with the word masochism. Put all those things together and you get their only child, born a year after the end of the war.  Her parents split when she was 6, and at 7, her mother sent her to boarding school at a Reading convent. (''Glynn begged her not to,'' she writes in ''Faithfull.'' ''I remember him saying, 'This will give her a problem with sex for the rest of her life.''') When she visited her father, who was living and teaching in a commune, she got a glimpse of the polar opposite end of the spectrum. At 18, she married the artist John Dunbar and gave birth to Nicholas shortly after.  ''I wanted to go to Oxford and read English literature, philosophy, and comparative religion. That was my plan,'' she said. ''Anyway, it didn't happen. I went to a party and got discovered by bloody old Andrew Loog Oldham.''  Oldham, the Rolling Stones' first manager, hadn't heard Faithfull sing a note; he just took a long look at her and decided this striking young blonde was destined to be a pop star. He had Mick Jagger and Keith Richards write a song for her, the melancholy ballad ''As Tears Go By.'' It was, in her words, ''a commercial fantasy'' that pushed ''all the right buttons.''  Which is to say she didn't take this accidental pop career of hers that seriously, not at first. On her debut tour, she always seemed to have her nose buried in a book, ''poring over my reading list for English literature as if I were going back to school.''  But that wasn't happening. In swinging, psychedelic London, Faithfull was a beautiful girl suddenly in the eye of a cultural hurricane. She met everybody. She left her husband and child behind, dabbling in everything the men did without apology. She and Richards dropped acid and went looking for the Holy Grail. She wrote in her autobiography that Bob Dylan tried to seduce her by playing her his latest album, ''Bringing It All Back Home,'' and explaining in detail what each track meant. (It didn't work. ''I just found him so ... daunting,'' she wrote. ''As if some god had come down from Olympus and started to come onto me.'')  Jagger had more luck, and for a few seemingly glamorous years they were a generational It Couple. But there were tensions from the start, and Faithfull wasn't sure she was cut out for the wifely muse role that, even in such bohemian circles, she was expected to play. Then there was the Redlands drug bust.  Tipped off by a sanctimonious British tabloid in February 1967, the police raided Richards's Sussex home during a small party, and found a modest amount of drugs. Faithfull had just taken a bath when the cops arrived, and the only clothes she brought were dirty, so without thinking too much about it she flung a rug over herself.  Jagger and Richards's subsequent drug trial is now generally seen as a pivot in mainstream acceptance of certain countercultural behaviors. But Faithfull bore the brunt of the backlash. One headline blared in all caps: Naked Girl at Stones Party. ''I was slandered as the wanton woman in the fur rug,'' Faithfull wrote, ''while Mick was the noble rock star on trial.'' It certainly wouldn't be the last rage-inducing double standard she'd endure.  A FEW YEARS ago, over a Christmas dinner, Faithfull gave Ellis's teenage children a long, anecdote-filled talk about why they should stay away from drugs. She spoke about the infamy at Redlands as though it was something they would be familiar with.  ''My kids had no idea what she was talking about,'' Ellis said. ''But when I drove her home, my son just looked at me and goes, '[Expletive], she's awesome.'''  Ellis -- who Faithfull affectionately described to me as ''a sexy old thing'' -- conducted his interview from a low-lit, brick-walled room that looked like it may or may not be a dungeon. This is where he was holed up for long hours last spring, listening to the voice of his dear friend, who may or may not have been dying, read him Romantic poetry.  He said he found the poems ''so incredibly beautiful and uplifting, a total balm for all this turmoil and sadness that was going on in the world.'' This was new: When he read them as a schoolboy in Melbourne, Ellis had found the Romantics mostly ''impenetrable.'' But listening to a masterful interpreter like Faithfull intone them, he said, ''suddenly they felt ageless. They felt freed of the page. Because of this authority and absolute belief in them. She believes what she's reading.''  In composing the tracks, Ellis wanted to shy away from the expected ''lutes and harpsichords'' approach. Instead he studied some of the records he thought most successfully blended spoken-word and music, like Gil Scott-Heron's ''I'm New Here,'' Sir John Betjeman's ''Late-Flowering Love'' and Lou Reed and Metallica's ''Lulu.'' Like Faithfull's fiery readings, Ellis's meditative compositions -- featuring contributions from Nick Cave and Brian Eno -- accentuate the poets' enduring modernity. (The Romantics might not have yet lived to see rock 'n' roll, but they certainly knew a thing or two about sex and drugs.)  Before Ellis was finished, he got the news that Faithfull had woken up from her coma, left the hospital -- and, in time, recorded four more poems. ''She survived Covid, came out, and recorded 'Lady of Shallot,''' Ellis said shaking his head, referring to the 12-minute Tennyson epic. ''She's just the best, Marianne.''  The remarkable -- and even fittingly spooky -- thing about the record is that you cannot tell which poems Faithfull recorded before or after her brush with death. Perhaps only Faithfull herself can hear the difference. ''I was quite fragile, but I didn't start to do it until I was better,'' she said. ''And I liked it very much, because I sound more vulnerable -- which is kind of nice, for the Romantics.''  Faithfull has fashioned sticking around into a prolonged show of defiance -- a radical act, for a woman. She did not come into her own musically until her mid-30s, with the release of her punky, scorched-earth 1979 masterpiece ''Broken English.'' In the subsequent decades, her artistry has only deepened, and she has gradually, grudgingly earned her respect (''I'm not just seen as a chick and a sexy piece anymore -- though I should think not, I'm 74!''). Her anger about the industry and the media subsided a great deal in the time between her 1994 and 2007 memoirs. What happened?  ''Just time, you know. From everything I know about life in general -- which is probably not much -- is that you have to get over those things, or they eat you up,'' she said. ''And I'm not going to let that happen. So I let it go. I don't hold resentment anymore about the press.'' She laughed, genially. ''But of course I don't let them near me, really!''  She has a lighter attitude, but Faithfull has not made it out of her latest battle without some lingering scars. She lost her dear friend and collaborator Hal Willner to the virus. And after initially feeling better, a few months ago she started feeling worse. She has since been experiencing the stubborn symptoms of long-haul Covid, which for her include fatigue, memory fog and lung problems.  She has been working diligently on her breathing; a close friend comes by weekly with a guitar to lead her in singing practice -- her own version of the opera therapy that has shown promising results in long Covid patients. She's been spending quality time with her son and grandson, reading (Miles Davis's autobiography, among other things), and counting the days until she can once again go to the movies, the opera, the ballet. When she first got out of the hospital -- après Covid, as she likes to call it -- it seemed like Faithfull may never sing again. Now, she is looking forward to writing new songs, and envisioning what a return to the stage might look like.  ''I'm focusing on getting better, really better -- and I'm beginning to,'' she said. ''I'll certainly never be able to work as hard as I was, and long tours are not going to be possible. But I do hope to do maybe five shows. Not very long -- 40 minutes perhaps.'' Still, she admitted, ''It's a long way away.''  Ellis said, ''If anyone can do it, it's Marianne, because she just doesn't give up. She constantly surprises you.''  Sometimes she even surprises herself. Earlier in our conversation, Faithfull had let me know, in her admirably no-nonsense way, that she hadn't called me up to chat for fun, but because she had an album to promote. But she ultimately admitted to finding it vivifying to talk about her life, her art, her past and future. ''It's good for me to remember who I really am, not just an old sick person,'' she said.  ''Of course,'' I replied. ''You're Marianne Faithfull, damn it!''  She mulled it over for a long moment. ''It's true, I am.'' Then, with an unexpected surge of strength, like a hammer's blow, she added, ''Damn it.''  ''You don't want to get this, darling,'' Marianne Faithfull, top, said recently of Covid-19. ''Really.'' Above is Faithfull with albums by Manfred Mann, Pete Seeger and others in London in October 1964. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANNY KASIRYE FOR THE new_york_times; JOHN PRATT/HULTON ARCHIVE, VIA GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00023 "
161		"   House & Home/ Prepare to Return To the Job Market  By Charlotte Cowles  1,675 words 25 April 2021   3     Many job seekers don't know where to look after the year we've just had. If you count yourself among this crowd, here's how to get back into the market, even if you're feeling rusty.  Airlines are canceling flights because they don't have enough pilots to fly them. Restaurants are posting open positions on their Instagram feeds. Even the local grocery store has a ''hiring'' sign out front. Welcome to spring 2021: After a year of being battered by the pandemic, the economy is finally showing signs of a strong, steady recovery, and jobs are popping up like crocuses. Employers added almost a million positions in March alone, according to the Labor Department.  ''Across our industry, everyone is prioritizing hiring,'' said Kelly McCulloch, the chief people officer at Taco Bell, which held a nationwide ''hiring party'' by converting parking lots into drive-through job fairs last week. The company's goal: To find 5,000 new employees in one day. ''It's definitely unprecedented,'' she said.  It's not just food, travel and hospitality businesses that are desperate for workers. ''The market for job candidates in the technology space is crazy right now,'' said Randi Weitzman, a recruiter for Robert Half, an international human resources consulting firm. ''There are more jobs than there are available candidates, and most candidates are receiving multiple competing offers.''  But with this hiring frenzy comes a new conundrum: How can the still-staggering number of unemployed Americans (about 9.7 million, per the latest report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or more if you're counting those who are underemployed) find their way to the right positions? Especially those people who have been out of the work force for months or even a full year?  ''It's frustrating when we hear job candidates say they've been looking for work and can't find it,'' said Richard Wahlquist, president and chief executive of the American Staffing Association, an alliance of recruiters and staffing agencies that helps companies fill contract and permanent roles. ''We've got more than seven million open jobs right now in America that businesses are having a hard time filling, and our members are having a hard time sourcing talent.''  The main problem, Mr. Wahlquist said, is that many job seekers don't know where to look -- or how to market themselves, especially in this new era of online job postings and remote work. ''A lot of people just aren't good at finding employment,'' he added. ''Most of us don't get taught how to do that by our parents, or in high school or college.''  If you count yourself among this crowd, here's how to bridge the disconnect and get back into the job market, even if you're feeling rusty.  Brush up on your digital communication skills.  If you haven't spent the past year in Zoom meetings, you didn't exactly miss out, but you still need to be able to present yourself as savvy and professional onscreen. ''A lot of interviews are virtual now, even if the job itself will be done in person,'' Ms. Weitzman said. ''People who've been out of the work force should practice setting up Zooms with their friends or family, so that they feel comfortable on video.''  Even if you've had plenty of experience chatting with people on FaceTime, that's not quite the same thing. ''Ask for feedback on how your background looks, and know where to look in the camera or on the screen in order to come across as engaged,'' Ms. Weitzman explained. ''It takes practice to be able to shake off nerves when you're going through the process.''  Look online -- and not just on LinkedIn.  LinkedIn is by far the biggest job-searching tool, and you'll want to make sure your profile is up-to-date and well tended. (Better yet, use the platform's ''Open to Work'' feature, which displays a badge on your profile photo that indicates you are looking for a new job and makes it easier for potential employers to find you.) But it's not the only place you should look; many employers are soliciting candidates on other social platforms, too, like Facebook and Instagram.  ''We're constantly looking for new ways to market our jobs,'' Ms. McCulloch said. ''To do that, we have to meet candidates where they are -- and many of them are on social channels.''  That goes both ways. If you're looking for work, it can be helpful to share that with your own online network. A friend or connection might be able to refer you to a job opening. ''We fill a lot of positions through referrals from existing employees,'' Ms. McCulloch said. (While you're at it, tidy up your social media presence -- potential employers might be put off by certain types of content.)  Finally, don't be scared of online networking events. Many offer useful services like résumé reviews and interview coaching.  Talk to an employment agency, recruiter, or headhunter.  Many job seekers think that they have to pay recruiters to find them jobs. But it's actually the opposite -- employers hire recruiters to find qualified candidates. And no matter what field you're in, there's probably a recruiter who's looking to staff it right now, Mr. Wahlquist assured. ''You can find one that represents people who do the kind of work that you've done, or what you're looking to do, based on your skills,'' he said. A Google search can provide names, while the American Staffing Association also has a directory online of employment firms that's searchable by location, field and job type.  Mr. Wahlquist recommends having initial conversations with recruiters, to give you a sense of what work they have done with people with backgrounds similar to yours. Feel free to ask the firm to help you identify exactly what your skill set is, and how to sell it.  ''Most of us have learned things over the course of our careers that don't logically fall out of our fingers onto a résumé,'' Mr. Wahlquist said. ''An employment professional will go through your education, training and job history to get a full picture of your hard and human skill sets, with an eye on what's needed today by employers.''  Broaden your horizons.  The transition to, and acceptance of, remote work has enabled employers to cast a wider net when they search for talent -- and so should you, in looking for jobs.  ''Many employers are open to hiring remote workers, but often in the same time zone,'' Ms. Weitzman said. ''That means if you live on the East Coast, you'll have multiple options in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Connecticut.'' Sure, this means you're competing with a bigger pool of candidates, but it also gives you more chances to find the right fit.  This could also be a good time to make a career transition. ''You might want to be more flexible and think about switching fields,'' Mr. Wahlquist said. ''Take those skills that you've developed and try to find something that is even better, or more sustainable long term.''  Meanwhile, consider taking a relevant training course, especially if you've been unemployed. ''If you're not working, I would 100-percent recommend to sign up for some training, because it shows initiative and a vested interest in updating and expanding your skill set,'' Ms. Weitzman said.  Be honest about why you're unemployed.  If you've been out of a job for a while, either for lack of opportunities or because you were busy shepherding children through Zoom school, that's OK. ''Everybody knows what happened this past year,'' Mr. Wahlquist said. ''Most people have a big free pass for a gap in their work history during the pandemic.''  Still, you should be prepared to explain -- succinctly -- what happened and what you've been doing since. ''Even if your past job loss wasn't entirely due to Covid, most employers want to start a relationship with transparency,'' he said.  And, potential employers will want to check up on your references. Expect that they'll want to talk to your former supervisors for the past five years, or past couple of jobs. ''Take this time to go back to those people and be direct,'' Mr. Wahlquist. ''You can ask, 'Will you be willing to give a reference, and able to give me a good reference?''' A question that your former supervisor might be asked is if he or she would rehire you. ''And if the answer is no, then why?''  Consider a temporary role.  Some people enjoy contract work. But many others prefer the security of a long-term role, especially one that offers benefits like health insurance, retirement plans, and paid sick leave or vacation time. What a lot of people don't realize is how useful temp work can be for landing a permanent position.  ''We see a lot of this in a recovering economy: Employers put people on temp-to-hire assignments,'' Mr. Wahlquist said. ''Essentially, it reduces a lot of the risk of hiring somebody, both for the job seeker and for the employer. You can see if your personality fits with your colleagues, and how you align in terms of mission values.'' If it isn't a slam dunk, you can both move on. But if it is, then your foot is in the door.  At the very least, contract work puts something on your résumé. ''It gets you experience, gets you exposure and gets you more references,'' Ms. Weitzman said. ''Sometimes a client falls in love with a contractor and says, 'I can't live without them, so I'm going to offer them a full-time job.' It's a great step for anyone to get back into the work force.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Miguel Porlan FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006f "
162		"   House & Home/ Explore Coral Reefs And Enjoy Artistic Bouquets  By Emma Grillo and Danya Issawi  980 words 25 April 2021   2     This week, watch a puppetry performance, break your Ramadan fast with a virtual open mic and iftar or listen to music from Yosmel Montejo and Vox Sambou.  Here is a sampling of the week's events and how to tune in (all times are Eastern). Note that events are subject to change after publication.  Monday  Watch a live presentation of ''Black Henry,'' a play by Luis H. Francia. It explores the consequences of Ferdinand Magellan's arrival in the Philippines in 1521, and the damage done by his attempt to colonize the islands. This event, sponsored by Sulo, the Philippines Studies Initiative at New York University, and produced by the university's King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center and Atlantic Pacific Theater, is free.  When 6:30 p.m.  Where facebook.com/kjccnyu/live  Tuesday  Learn a new recipe from Reem Kassis, a Palestinian food writer and author of the James Beard Award-nominated cookbook ''The Palestinian Table.'' In a cooking class presented by the Museum of Food and Drink in New York, Ms. Kassis will talk about her new cookbook, ''The Arabesque Table: Contemporary Recipes From the Arab World,'' and teach viewers how to make fava beans in olive oil with garlic, cilantro and lime. Tickets are $15.  When 7 p.m.  Where mofad.org/events/2021/0421/thearabesquetable  Tune into the inaugural episode of ''Black History, Continued,'' presented by The new_york_times. The Times's Veronica Chambers will lead the audience through an evening exploring dreams and imagination. The poet Nikki Giovanni will read verse, followed by a discussion among Peter Ramsey, a director of ''Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse,'' the author N. K. Jemisin and the singer, actress and radio host Estelle, who also will perform later in the evening, and Ms. Chambers. This event, which features original animations from the artist Reyna Noriega throughout, is free and registration is required.  When 7 p.m.  Where nytimes.com/interactive/2020/admin/live-events.html#event-9c1h4  Wednesday  Watch ''MINE,'' a solo puppetry performance directed and performed by Shayna Strype, a theater, film and puppetry artist. Using various puppetry styles, live-feed projections and wearable sculptures, the performance explores nostalgia, excess and colonization. The recorded show, which is presented by Dixon Place, a nonprofit arts incubator, is available to watch on demand through May 3. Tickets are $18.  When Anytime  Where dixonplace.org/performances/mine-04-10-21  Dive down to the coral reefs of South Florida and the Caribbean with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Woods Hole Sea Grant and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. In a presentation designed for kids ages 7 to 14, scientists from the NOAA's Southeast Fisheries Science Center in Key Biscayne, Fla., will teach viewers about the region's coral reef ecosystem and the importance of counting fish. This event is free and includes live ASL interpretation. Attendance is capped at 1,000.  When 4 p.m.  Where seagrant.whoi.edu/suggested-educational-resources-for-use-during-school-closures/webinars-noaa-live  Thursday  Listen to a conversation between Michelle Zauner, an author and musician who performs under the name Japanese Breakfast, and Ben Gibbard, the lead vocalist and guitarist of Death Cab for Cutie. The two will speak about Ms. Zauner's new memoir, ''Crying in H Mart,'' which grew out of a 2018 essay in The New Yorker about the death of her mother. The talk, hosted by Powell's Books in Portland, Ore., is free and registration is required.  When 11 p.m.  Where powells.com/events-update  Friday  Break your Ramadan fast with a virtual open mic and iftar, presented by the Arab American National Museum. The artist in residence Lara Atallah will be the evening's host, celebrating both National Poetry Month and Arab American Heritage Month. Writers and musicians are welcome to share their work and are encouraged to sign up ahead of time to perform. This event is free.  When 8 p.m.  Where facebook.com/arabamericanmus  Celebrate spring with the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston's ''Art in Bloom'' festival. For 45 years, floral designers have created installations inspired by works in the museum's collection, which are then displayed alongside the art. The museum is offering three recorded tours of floral installations inspired by works in its collection. Each tour costs $10, and is available to stream through May 3.  When Anytime  Where mfa.org/event/special-event/art-in-bloom  Saturday  Dance along to the musical stylings of Yosmel Montejo and Vox Sambou during a virtual concert presented by the Skirball Cultural Center. Mr. Montejo will perform alongside his band of Latin jazz musicians at the Skirball's Ahmanson Hall, followed by Mr. Sambou taking the virtual stage in Montreal, his home, to perform music that blends Haitian rhythms with Afrobeat, jazz, reggae and hip-hop. This event is free, although registration is encouraged. It will stream on the center's YouTube channel after the premiere.  When 11 p.m.  Where skirball.org/programs/skirball-stages/yosmel-montejo-and-vox-sambou  Sunday  Kick off the summer with a virtual festival celebrating Hispanic culture and music. Hosted by Lele Pons and AJ Ramos, the Anheuser-Busch ''Reventón de Verano'' livestream will feature musical acts like Becky G, Prince Royce and Myke Towers, with special appearances by Eva Longoria, Wilmer Valderrama and others. Guests 21 and older who register in advance can be entered for a chance to virtually meet artists and to win prizes, including autographed photos. This event, produced by First Tube Media, is free to stream on the event's main page or on Anheuser-Busch's Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and YouTube.  When 6 p.m.  Where ReventonLive.com  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Miguel Porlan FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006d "
163		"   House & Home/ Weave Coy Clues  By Andrew Dore and Robert Vinluan  343 words 25 April 2021   9     On the first anniversary of the At Home section, zigzag through this puzzle to reveal the twist.  This week is the one-year anniversary of the At Home section, and what better way to celebrate than with a puzzle containing a hidden picture? Solve the clues and reveal the twist, with a mini shout-out to the section's basket-weaving activity from August.  Write the answers to the 16 clues in the blank spaces on each strip. (We've filled in some letters to help.) Then cut and sort the strips into one of the four categories, based on your answers. Can you find what connects them? Words starting with B? Animals you'd find on a farm? We've given you a clue for each category.  Once you've sorted your strips into categories, the A and B groups become the vertical ''warp'' for your weaving; the C and D groups are woven through them horizontally. They should be ordered alphabetically within their categories. Follow the diagram to weave the strips in an under-and-over pattern, with the lettered squares going under the vertical strips. The weaving will reveal the hidden picture.  Step 1  Place the A and B groups vertically using alphabetical order within each group, starting from the left and alternating groups.  Step 2  Start with the first strip alphabetically from the C group and weave it in, making sure the lettered squares go under the A strips. Slide the strip to the bottom.  Step 3  Repeat with the first alphabetical strip from the D group, making sure it goes under the B strips. Keep weaving, alternating strips from the C and D groups until you have used all your strips.  Step 4  Congratulations! You've revealed the image! Now fold and tape the extra tabs to square the sides and save your artwork.  A printable version of this activity is available for download here.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Robert Vinluan FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0006b "
164		"   PAPERBACK ROW  New in Paperback: 'Why We Swim' and 'The End of October'  By Jennifer Krauss  409 words 25 April 2021   24     THE EQUIVALENTS: A Story of Art, Female Friendship, and Liberation in the 1960s, by Maggie Doherty. (Vintage, 400 pp., $16.95.) The poets Anne Sexton and Maxine Kumin, the artist Barbara Swan, the sculptor Marianna Pineda and the writer Tillie Olsen ''knit themselves together into a friend group'' in 1962, when they were all recipients of a Radcliffe Institute fellowship, and called themselves ''the Equivalents'' (since fellowship applicants were required to have a doctorate or equivalent).  WHY WE SWIM, by Bonnie Tsui. (Algonquin, 288 pp., $16.95.) Mixing history, journalism and memoir, Tsui mulls the appeal of this ''most commonplace and relaxing way of putting yourself in total peril,'' as our reviewer, Mary Pols, phrased it. Tsui's evocation of swimming's state of flow made Pols ''long to be in the pool or the ocean.''  THE END OF OCTOBER, by Lawrence Wright. (Vintage, 400 pp., $17.) The Pulitzer Prize-winning nonfiction author applies ''the magisterial force of his reporting skills'' to this ''chilling'' novel about an epidemiologist's ''Odysseus-like return home'' from a ''biological battleground.'' While written before the current pandemic, our reviewer, Douglas Preston, observed, it cuts ''exceedingly close to the bone.''  ON VANISHING: Mortality, Dementia, and What It Means to Disappear, by Lynn Casteel Harper. (Catapult, 240 pp., $16.95.) What gives this ''poetic inquiry'' by a chaplain its ''energy,'' according to the Times critic Parul Sehgal, is its focus on literary models of compassion. Emerson's friends referred to him as ''dreaming'' rather than ''deteriorating.'' And Lear's Fool possessed ideal caregiver qualities: ''loyalty, steadfastness, wit.''  MBS: The Rise to Power of Mohammed Bin Salman, by Ben Hubbard. (Crown, 384 pp., $18.) Our reviewer, Christopher Dickey, called this portrait of Saudi Arabia's crown prince and de facto ruler, which was a 2021 PEN America finalist, ''detailed and disturbing.'' Hubbard, The Times's Beirut bureau chief, interviewed individuals inside the kingdom, until the Saudis stopped giving him visas.  THESE WOMEN, by Ivy Pochoda. (Ecco, 352 pp., $16.99.) The most memorable of this ''intricate, deeply felt, beautifully written'' thriller's five female narrators, our reviewer, Sarah Lyall, noted, is a ''diminutive, damaged, brilliant'' detective. Her male colleagues refuse to listen when she says a serial killer is to blame for the deaths of 17 women -- sex workers, street people, marginalized citizens of color -- in Los Angeles.  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00069 "
165		"    Far, Far Apart, But Dwelling On Same 'Coast'  By Chris Vognar  1,849 words 25 April 2021   5     Ahead of the new Apple TV+ series, the author and actor talked about their collaboration and the shared history behind it.  Allie Fox, the escapee from society at the heart of ''The Mosquito Coast,'' is no fan of any technology he didn't invent. So it's kind of a kick to talk to Paul and Justin Theroux on Zoom, a video chatting app that Allie would abhor as intrusive.  Paul wrote the novel ''The Mosquito Coast,'' originally published in 1981. His nephew Justin plays Allie in the new Apple TV+ adaptation, premiering April 30. (Both men are executive producers). Paul, also one of the world's foremost travel writers, was working in Hawaii when we spoke earlier this month (''I can see the Pacific Ocean from my window,'' he said); Justin was at home in New York. Both were eager to discuss this unique familial collaboration, the story of a disillusioned, egomaniacal white patriarch and his family who must flee the United States.  ''Nepotism had nothing to do with this,'' Paul said. ''This was all a happy accident, but it's great. I've made a number of films of my books, but I've never talked to an actor in such a friendly, intimate way.''  Among the other topics on the table when we spoke: the significant differences between the novel, which also inspired a faithful 1986 movie starring Harrison Ford, and the series. In the book, Allie, an inventor thoroughly sick of modern life and convinced the next world war is imminent, uproots his family from Massachusetts to Honduras, where he tries to create a self-styled utopia. Hostile missionaries and other obstacles, including his own delusions, stand in his way.  Some of that could still happen in later seasons of the series. (Only one has been greenlighted thus far.) But for now, Allie and his family, which now includes a teen daughter (Logan Polish), are running from the law for mysterious reasons. They execute a reverse (and bloody) border crossing to Mexico, where they stumble into a fine mess with a cartel lord.  The first season is a tightly plotted suspense thriller and family drama with philosophical heft. Through the course of seven hourlong episodes, it's also a great example of how to adapt the written word for the screen.  ''Hopefully, knock on wood, in subsequent seasons we'll be getting more into the core themes of the book,'' Justin said.  From their perches on opposite ends of the country, uncle and nephew also discussed the familial and political roots of ''Mosquito Coast,'' the similarities between yesterday and today and the pleasures of portraying a man who is unflagging in his dangerous convictions. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.  It's been 40 years since ''The Mosquito Coast'' was published. What inspired it?  PAUL THEROUX It was the times, particularly the late '70s. Japan was flooding the U.S. market with cars and electronic goods. And bank interest rates were at 18 percent. People were blaming the government. I was also thinking about Huckleberry Finn's father, and Jim Jones, and [the founder of Mormonism] Joseph Smith. I wanted to think of the personification of someone who wanted to leave the country and take his family with him and say: ''This isn't the country I grew up in. It's gone wrong. Let's go someplace.''  Justin, can you remember the first time you read the book?  JUSTIN THEROUX I actually have a vivid memory of reading it on a bus going to and from school, when I was living in Washington, D.C. I think it was a couple years above my pay grade when it came out. I probably read it four years later, and it made a big impression on me, especially the character of the son, Charlie, who is the narrator and the P.O.V. I loved it. Then, once the movie came out, me and my brothers and sisters and cousins were all kind of enamored with the fact that Harrison Ford was going to be doing a movie of it.  PAUL THEROUX This was the first book of mine that my kids could actually connect with. My sons, Louis and Marcel, were 11 and 13. Justin was 10, so he was in the same sort of family milieu. I deliberately made the kids in the book the age of my kids so that they could read it and relate to it.  What was it like keeping it all in the family for this series?  PAUL THEROUX Justin independently auditioned for it. I had nothing to do with that.  JUSTIN THEROUX It was one of those happy accidents that it came up on my radar. I raised my hand slightly high and said, ''I'd like to at least see the scripts, and if I like them, meet with Neil Cross.'' And then I read the scripts, and I thought, ''These are fabulous.'' And then I ended up meeting with Neil, and then had the joy of being able to call Paul, and, ''Hey, I think this is going to happen.'' I had an enormous amount of fun, because there are elements to Allie that are absolutely my grandfather, Paul's father. Just his incredible thriftiness.  Frequently, he would take me and my cousins and brothers and sisters to the dump, like Allie does with his son in the series. He would trash-pick and find books and new pairs of shoes that he'd pull out of a heap and put on our feet.  PAUL THEROUX My father's philosophy was, if it's not in the Sears catalog, or if you can't find it on the beach, you probably don't need it. Those were the days when the dump was just a big pile of possibility, and my father would pick something up and say, ''I don't need it now, but this is going to come in handy.'' And my father was a tinkerer, too, making things, fixing things. He wasn't brilliant at it, but he would say: ''I could do it. Why would you pay someone to do this?''  In the series, the law is coming for the Fox family, though we're not sure why. In the novel, they leave of their own volition. What was the idea behind that change?  JUSTIN THEROUX I think there were certain decisions that Neil Cross [the series's creator] had to make when faced with serializing it. The characters are largely the same but updated and built-out a little bit. But when you have that much runway in front of you -- it could be two, three, four seasons or more -- Neil, I think, smartly made some changes. So the law is now the propellant that forces them out of the country, as opposed to Allie's own freewill and wanderlust.  Neil was very clear from the beginning: The movie's obviously been made, and to do a faithful retelling of it in the serialized version would feel like we were maybe eating someone else's sandwich. But the one thing we had very sharp elbows about was protecting the character of Allie and his philosophy on life and those sorts of things.  PAUL THEROUX The idea of being pursued is terrific for a series. In a movie, it's different. I think that series are truer to books than films are. A film becomes something else, but a series is like ... do you know what a Victorian three-decker novel is? Well, novels used to be trilogies. So when Charles Dickens was writing ''David Copperfield,'' it was two or three books. It wasn't just one.  A TV series is a very literary form because it's in parts: Part 1, then Part 2, then Part 3, Part 4. A film isn't. A film encapsulates and leaves a lot out, but the detail that you find in a novel can be elaborated on in a series. That's the pleasure, actually, of a series.  Justin, what drew you to Allie as a character?  JUSTIN THEROUX There's complexity to the character, but he doesn't overcomplicate things for himself because he's obviously married to his convictions. I really like that. I thought it was going to be hard to play. But when you're playing someone who's that shiny a penny in his own mind, and that convinced of his own correctness, then it's liberating. Your whole body opens up, and you think, ''Oh, this is really fun.''  He can be by turns extremely charming and funny, but also infuriating. I was thinking of ''The Great Santini,'' or that kind of classic antihero. He's not square-jawed and leaning into the wind and can solve any problem that way. He's deeply flawed, but I just found him really enjoyable.  Paul, can you see similarities between the time the novel was written and today?  PAUL THEROUX I truly believe that today is a distant echo of the late '70s. The economy is in the toilet. With the pandemic, there's also no shortage of people who are saying, ''I'd like to leave.'' I mean, you probably know them. They're saying: ''I'd like to go to Mexico. I'd like to go to New Zealand. I want to go to Canada. I'd like to go somewhere else.'' It's amazing.  People want to go do what Allie Fox did. Allie Fox says, ''I'm taking the best of America with me, and we're going to remake America somewhere else.'' There are plenty of people now saying that very thing. Trust in the government is at an all-time low. So Allie has to leave, in the series, because the government is after him. But he's the sort of person that would want to go. And he goes to Mexico, which is terrific. I like the idea that he's crossing the border the other way.  What keeps us from hating Allie, with all of his character flaws?  PAUL THEROUX As a can-do guy, and as an optimist, Allie inspires people to come with him. No one's going to follow him if he's downbeat. Justin has that to a T. It's impressive that he brings his family with him, and that they're on his side.  JUSTIN THEROUX He's also not a liar, so he's not a bastard in that sense. He might commit sins of omission, or he might make a promise that looks very different from what it ends up being. But he's true to his word.  Above, Justin Theroux. Right, Melissa George, Logan Polish, Gabriel Bateman and Theroux in ''Mosquito Coast.'' Below, Paul Theroux, whose book is about an idealist who flees America. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR LLORENTE FOR THE new_york_times; APPLE TV+; MICHELLE MISHINA KUNZ FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00066 "
166		"    Letters  761 words 25 April 2021   6     His Life as a Man  To the Editor:  I have been a reader of the Book Review for more than 50 years, but I have never written in. Cynthia Ozick's review of ''Philip Roth: The Biography'' (April 11) changed my mind. Simply put: This is the single best written book review I have ever read in my entire life.  I have been a loyal reader of all of Philip Roth's books, and now Blake Bailey's astonishing biography. Ozick, who is a gifted writer, absolutely brings to life, in her peerless prose and perceptiveness, the character of both Roth and the biography itself. Roth was one of the deans of American literature in the 20th century. Full stop. Whatever his critics may have said -- and are saying -- his 31 books are a testament to a life well written.  Ozick's review is so beautifully written, so eloquent, so challenging, that I wish she too had written the Roth biography. Blake Bailey's gift as a biographer -- so evident with his book on John Cheever -- is astonishing, and Ozick's appreciation of that writing is remarkably generous. Her final sentence is worthy of Tolstoy and should be taught in every English class in this country: ''What remains on the page is one writer's life as it was lived, and -- almost -- as it was felt.''  Bravo Cynthia Ozick, bravo Blake Bailey and bravo Philip Roth.  Evan Charkes  Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  â¦  To the Editor:  Next time you assign a review for a new biography, try not to choose a partisan for the job. Ozick only briefly mentions the author of the latest Philip Roth biography before devoting the bulk of her bulky review justifying the problematic Roth and his uneven oeuvre. She is particularly harsh on the legion of women Roth dumped, dismissively stressing they were all ''ardently consensual.''  She rather coarsely describes how when Roth's first wife was killed in a car crash, ''Roth is suddenly liberated.'' Roth's second wife, Claire Bloom, wrote a surprisingly evenhanded account of her marriage, but Ozick characterizes it as ''vindictive,'' even though the word more accurately describes Roth's largely worthless ''I Married a Communist,'' which was meant to even the score. The reviewer even denigrates Bloom's love of her daughter as a ''bizarre and consuming fixation.''  A review is meant to convey enough of a book to assist potential buyers in making up their minds. If Ozick's hagiographic review accurately conveys Bailey's hagiographic biography, we can all safely put it on our ''Must Miss'' list.  Geoffrey Bent  Brooklyn  â¦  To the Editor:  Congratulations on the amazing piece of art you commissioned from Ian Wright. It is a perfect foil for the review.  Jessica Weber  New York  Hand to Mouth  To the Editor:  Elizabeth McCracken's damning-with-faint-praise review of Jackie Polzin's ''Brood'' (April 4) is a skillful if pointless insult to a fellow novelist -- one whose work had the bad fortune to fall into the hands of a reviewer who wished it a different book.  McCracken confesses that bad reviews of her own work by ''professional critics'' have meant little to her, while ''the mildest mixed praise from one of my own, a fiction writer, is incised forever on my heart.''  If only she had considered those incisions before taking the scalpel to a colleague's work by producing exactly the kind of mixed-praise review that has pained her.  Larry Rothe  Berkeley, Calif.  Unhistoric Acts  To the Editor:  The close of A. O. Scott's fine essay on Tillie Olsen (March 28) recalled the famous words that end ''Middlemarch'': ''But the effect of her being on those around her was incalculably diffusive: for the growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts; and that things are not so ill with you and me as they might have been, is half owing to the number who lived faithfully a hidden life, and rest in unvisited tombs.''  Penny Rose  Toronto  The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer's name, address and telephone number. Letters should be addressed to The Editor, The new_york_times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. The email address is books@nytimes.com. Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ian Wright FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00065 "
167		"   CRIME  How to Get Away With Murder  By Sarah Weinman  914 words 25 April 2021   9     This column doesn't do trend spotting, but the proliferation of crime novels featuring true-crime podcasts as a plot device has not escaped notice. (I write and edit crime nonfiction; listening to such podcasts is an occupational hazard.) In her propulsive debut, GIRL, 11 (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 340 pp., $25), Amy Suiter Clarke ventures further in the fusion of real-life and fictional crime storytelling, making the reader privy to excerpts and transcripts from ''Justice Delayed,'' the podcast hosted by her protagonist, Elle Castillo.  Elle investigates old cases to right wrongs and center the voices of victims of crime. But this new season of her show -- focused on an unidentified serial culprit dubbed the Countdown Killer who, decades before, had poisoned his victims with deadly castor beans -- threatens to undo her on professional and personal levels: ''She had felt pressure to solve cold cases she investigated on earlier seasons of the podcast, but nothing compared to this. It felt like the whole world was watching her.''  Not only is the book difficult to put down, it's also an adroit exploration of the ethical quandaries of true-crime storytelling, particularly in podcasts. For Elle, whose stake in finding a resolution runs deeper than she's willing to admit, and for her listeners, these moral dilemmas take on a frightening edge.  Jonathan Ames has been dancing around the edges of the crime genre for a number of years now, as evidenced by the postmodern HBO comedy series ''Bored to Death'' and his noirish novella-turned-film ''You Were Never Really Here.'' He has surrendered fully, and pleasurably, to his fate in A MAN NAMED DOLL (Mulholland, 224 pp., $26), the first in a dark new private detective series that's a tightly coiled double helix of offbeat humor and unflinching violence.  The detective's introduction sums up his entire personality: ''Most people call me Hank, but my real name is Happy, Happy Doll. My parents saddled me with that name. They didn't think it was a joke. They'd been hoping for the best. Can't say it worked out. Can't say it didn't.'' Hank scrapes by working security for the Thai Miracle Spa. Inanimate objects -- his house, his avocado tree -- get his open love declarations, but people? Not so much. His deepest relationship is with his rescue dog, George.  Things go wrong as soon as Hank accidentally kills a meth-crazed customer at the spa (''I meant to shoot him in the leg to slow him down, but my hand was unsteady and I shot him through the neck and blood geysered out in a spray''), angering powerful people and setting up a cascade of ever more gruesome acts. There will be excised body parts, kidnappings, coerced surgeries, stolen cash, people tossed off balconies, fists rammed into Adam's apples. Wherever Hank Doll goes, no matter how strange the trip, I'll definitely follow.  Books shouldn't be judged by their covers, but what about their epigraphs? Cate Holahan draws the title of her newest suspense novel, HER THREE LIVES (Grand Central, 352 pp., paper, $15.99), from a quote by Gabriel García Márquez: ''All human beings have three lives: public, private and secret.'' It's a telling quote that also shades the truth, for that tidy division blurs in the face of reality, as one couple is about to discover.  Jade Thompson is a social media influencer, and her fiancé, Greg, is an architect. Their 20-year age difference bothers him more than her, but it really sets off whoever invaded their home, caused Jade to miscarry and left Greg for dead.  Maybe it's an obsessed fan of Jade's. Maybe the resentments of the family he left not long before meeting Jade have bubbled up to near-fatal levels. Or maybe the break-in is related to financial matters, both obvious and hidden. Trust erodes and tensions rise, even if the conclusion is telegraphed early enough that my interest began to wane.  Still, Holahan's propensity toward melodrama at high pitch is quite entertaining, even if her ambitions aren't quite met here.  For Meddelin Chan, the wedding photographer protagonist of DIAL A FOR AUNTIES (Berkley, 299 pp., paper, $16), Jesse Q. Sutanto's screwball adult debut, family loyalty is especially complicated. On the one hand, her lifelong devotion to her mother and aunts persuaded her to walk away from a formative relationship -- something she still regrets -- and work with them on a full-service wedding business. On the other hand, who else can she turn to when a dead body turns up in her car, something that's not her fault? On the one wedding weekend that could make or break their business?  What follows is what might transpire from mashing up Natsuo Kirino's standout novel ''Out'' and the madcap film ''Muriel's Wedding,'' inflected with the hybrid linguistics Meddelin grew up with (''My Mandarin is awful, and my Cantonese nonexistent,'' she says). It's a high-wire act of comic timing, misunderstandings, romantic foibles and possibly foiled heists -- not to mention, what's going to happen to that dead body?  The glue is Meddelin, endearing, capable and in full thrall to her elders, who are all absolute hoots to keep company with.  Sarah Weinman writes the Crime column for the Book Review.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pablo Amargo FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00062 "
168		"   BY THE BOOK  Chris Bohjalian  1,635 words 25 April 2021   7     ''I also loved to read in swimming pools, pre-Covid, when vacations were a thing,'' says the novelist, whose latest book is ''Hour of the Witch.''  What books are on your night stand?  I'm old school and don't read on a tablet, and so my night stand is a Jenga tower of galleys and manuscripts for books that won't be published for months. It's terrifying. One night, it's going to collapse and kill me in my sleep. There are always at least one or two books that are research for whatever novel I'm writing, which means in this case I have a book about skydiving and a book about the Ottoman massacre of Armenians in Adana, Turkey, in 1909. But three novels were recently published that I'd been looking forward to, and so amid the unstable skyscraper are Carol Edgarian's ''Vera''; Kazuo Ishiguro's ''Klara and the Sun''; and Viet Thanh Nguyen's ''The Committed.''  I'm always listening to audiobooks, too. Currently, it's James McBride's ''Deacon King Kong.''  What's the last great book you read?  Here are two I've read in the last four years that I recommend often: Rebecca Makkai's ''The Great Believers'' and Amor Towles's ''A Gentleman in Moscow.''  But I seem to reread ''The Great Gatsby'' more than any other novel, and the ending never fails to leave me happily melancholic. For a while I collected mass-market paperback editions of the book from the mid-20th century, and the covers are a scream. I have one where Gatsby looks like a 50-something vampire about to welcome Daisy into the world of the undead. She's in a strapless gown -- all exposed neck and shoulders -- and he looks, well, ravenous. The cover also boasts that it's ''complete and unabridged,'' which always makes me smile because the novel is barely 47,000 words long. Can you imagine someone with a red pen in 1955 thinking to himself, ''Hmm, do we really need 'boats against the current'?''  Describe your ideal reading experience (when, where, what, how).  I can read for hours in the bath. In the winter, when the sun sets early, it's pretty close to heaven to read there on a Sunday afternoon and watch the sun disappear over the small mountain west of where I live. I also loved to read in swimming pools, pre-Covid, when vacations were a thing. I'd stand waist-deep in the water, the book open flat on the coralline lip of the pool.  Which writers -- novelists, playwrights, critics, journalists, poets -- working today do you admire most?  There's no way on earth I can answer this without offending someone, since most of my friends are writers. But Margaret Atwood, Jodi Picoult and Colson Whitehead come to mind because they are prolific and they're fearless when it comes to trying new things.  What do you read when you're working on a book? And what kind of reading do you avoid while writing?  I write best when I'm reading novels that give me an inferiority complex. When I was reading Ayad Akhtar's ''Homeland Elegies,'' for instance, I'd be at my desk the next morning and try to begin the day writing one sentence with two words as interesting as his pairing ''orphic concordances.'' I also read lots of nonfiction that will help me bring a scene to life. I never have writer's block, but when a novel is stalling, it's usually because I haven't done my homework and need to dig deeper into the research.  Your new novel anticipates the start of the Salem witch hysteria a few decades later. What other books would you recommend to people interested in the subject?  Begin with poetry by Anne Bradstreet. You won't find witches, but you will find poems that celebrate her love for her husband and the natural world, as well as one that mourns the loss of her library in a fire and another that expressed her desperate pain at the death of a grandchild. You will find spiritual doubt. They're beautiful, and they remind us that the Puritans' internal lives were as complex as ours.  There are plenty of fascinating books about witchcraft in history and about Salem in particular, but the one I like best is ''The Devil in the Shape of a Woman,'' by Carol F. Karlsen. Bonus points for the title alone.  Has a book ever brought you closer to another person, or come between you?  When I finished Howard Frank Mosher's ''A Stranger in the Kingdom'' as a young man, I was so moved that I wrote him. He wrote back, one of his classic, handwritten letters penned in blue ink on lined, yellow paper. We'd be friends until he died. I dedicated one of my novels to him.  What's the most interesting thing you learned from a book recently?  From Sy Montgomery's lovely ''The Soul of an Octopus'': An octopus would make a terrible pet, but not because they're dangerous. Rather, they're playful and smart and usually gentle with humans, but they're likely to get themselves into trouble slithering out of their tank.  After reading her book, I went to the New England Aquarium just to watch them.  What moves you most in a work of literature?  Heartbreak. I love books that leave me weeping inside. (I would have killed Harry Potter at the end of Book 7.) ''A Little Life,'' by Hanya Yanagihara, ''Room,'' by Emma Donoghue, ''Never Let Me Go,'' by Kazuo Ishiguro, ''Beloved,'' by Toni Morrison, and ''Sophie's Choice,'' by William Styron, destroyed me in all the best ways.  Do you distinguish between ''commercial'' and ''literary'' fiction? Where's that line, for you?  I love what Justice Potter Stewart said about pornography: ''I know it when I see it.'' I feel the same way about ''commercial'' versus ''literary'' fiction. I appreciate both. One difference for me personally? I know I'm reading a ''literary'' novel if I'm using lots of Post-it notes. But the truth is, if I'm turning the pages avidly, I don't judge.  What book might people be surprised to find on your shelves?  ''The Book of General Ignorance,'' by John Lloyd and John Mitchinson. It's where I learned that if I'm ever battling a crocodile, a rubber band will serve me better than a paper clip.  What's the best book you've ever received as a gift?  I'm a grandson of survivors of the Armenian genocide. One Christmas, my wife gave me a 1934 edition of ''The Forty Days of Musa Dagh,'' Franz Werfel's epic novel about the heroic stand of 4,000 Armenian men, women and children against the Ottoman Army atop a small mountain on the Mediterranean Sea.  What kind of reader were you as a child? Which childhood books and authors stick with you most?  I was an avid reader. I was also an avid artist with Magic Markers, and I drew the Starship Enterprise in the sky above the Caribbean on the dust jacket of my mother's first edition of Ernest Hemingway's ''The Old Man and the Sea,'' and I colored in the leaves on her first edition of Harper Lee's ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' so the cover resembled a Peter Max poster.  The books that stuck with me are the ones that are heartbreaking: ''Flowers for Algernon,'' by Daniel Keyes; ''To Kill a Mockingbird''; and ''Johnny Tremain,'' by Esther Forbes. I can still tell you the last line of all of them.  How have your reading tastes changed over time?  John Mulaney jokes that dads are always ''cramming for some World War II quiz show,'' and I've read a lot about World War II the last 15 years.  If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be?  What is a book that engenders empathy? Off the top of my head, that might include ''Between the World and Me,'' by Ta-Nehisi Coates. But given the climate change nightmare we're facing, I might also suggest ''The Sixth Extinction,'' by Elizabeth Kolbert.  You're organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite?  Writers have lots of dinners with other writers, and the best conversations are when we share litanies of humiliating moments in our careers, or the single worst things we've written. So, I'd want writers who would make me laugh. Here are three who I think would fit the bill: Zadie Smith, Augusten Burroughs and Gary Shteyngart. (If you all say yes, the dinner is on me.)  Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel as if you were supposed to like, and didn't? Do you remember the last book you put down without finishing?  I do remember the last book I didn't finish. When you're my age, time is precious, so I'm very comfortable putting a book down if I'm not enjoying it. Likewise, I could tell you which books I thought were overrated. But would you forgive me if I didn't? Although it's clear that some books are better than others by any objective standard, literature isn't algebra. Two people can have wildly different opinions about a book and both be right.  What books are you embarrassed not to have read yet?  Maybe I was scarred by too many terrible community theater productions of ''Oliver!'' but other than ''A Christmas Carol,'' I haven't read a single word of Charles Dickens.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jillian Tamaki FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00061 "
169		"    Chapters  By Tina Jordan  185 words 25 April 2021   27     Just as it does today, in its earliest years, the Book Review occasionally commissioned poetry -- from John Masefield, Percy MacKaye (who delivered ''The Heart in the Jar: A Meditation on the Nobel Prize Award for Medical Research, 1912'') and even Edgar Lee Masters of ''Spoon River Anthology'' fame, whose verse about Theodore Dreiser, his contemporary in the Chicago Renaissance literary movement, graced the Oct. 31, 1915, issue.  Despite the fact that it ran on Halloween -- and was filled with terrifying imagery that compared Dreiser to a jack-o'-lantern, with ''eyes [that] burn like a flame at the end of a funnel'' and ''powerful teeth'' -- the poem doesn't seem to have been written as a holiday spoof. Like ''Theodore: A Poet,'' a homage to Dreiser that appeared in ''Spoon River Anthology,'' this piece was later reprinted in several books about the ''Sister Carrie'' novelist.  Tina Jordan is the deputy editor of the Book Review and co-author of ''The new_york_times Book Review: 125 Years of Literary History,'' which will be published in the fall.  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00060 "
170		"    From the Archives  145 words 25 April 2021   2     With the holy month of Ramadan underway, Muslims around the world are observing with prayer, fasting and rededication to their communities. Jessie Wender, a photo editor, searched the archives for images of Muslims in the New York City area during festive moments, and quieter ones too, from top: breaking the fast in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, 1983; a service at the Yusuf Shah Mosque in Mount Vernon, N.Y., 1994; and a belly dancer entertaining a crowd gathered in Paterson, N.J., to celebrate the end of Ramadan, 1968.  What would you like to see in our photo archive? Ideas can be sent to thearts@nytimes.com with the subject line ''Photo Archive.''  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RICKI ROSEN FOR THE new_york_times; CARL DAVID LaBIANCA FOR THE new_york_times; MIKE LIEN/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005z "
171		"    English Soccer Is Set to Boycott Social Media Over Online Abuse  By Jesus Jiménez and Andrew Das  1,030 words 25 April 2021   35     The boycott, set to begin on Friday, is the most direct effort yet by a sport to pressure social media companies like Twitter, Instagram and Facebook to take action against abuse.  English soccer officials said Saturday that they would conduct a social media blackout next weekend to protest ''the ongoing and sustained discriminatory abuse received online by players and many others connected to football.''  The boycott has the support of a coalition of groups, including the Premier League, the richest and most high profile soccer league in the world, but also England's soccer federation; the top two professional tiers of men's and women's soccer; referees; the country's players union, and others.  The action is the most direct effort yet by a sport to pressure social media companies like Twitter, Instagram and Facebook to take action against online abuse, and comes after a season in which players, clubs, team executives, referees, female commentators and others have been the targets of abuse.  The social media boycott also follows a week of fury and street protests against top clubs and their owners who tried -- and failed -- to create a breakaway European Super League that would have walled them off from many of the structures, including the pay system, that have sustained soccer for a century. At each of the protests, there were vitriolic demands for the owners of teams to sell.  Cases of harassment have been well documented online. In February, Arsenal striker Eddie Nketiah posted a picture on Twitter with the caption ''Working with a smile!''  The tweet was met with racist abuse from a Twitter user who told Nketiah, who is Black, to leave the club. Twitter responded by permanently suspending the user's account, Sky Sports reported.  Such harassment has been instigated not only by fans, but also by club social media accounts. In December, the commentator and former soccer player Karen Carney deleted her Twitter account after she received a wave of online abuse.  After a 5-0 win by Leeds United over West Brom, Carney on Amazon Prime Video Sport wondered whether Leeds would ''blow up at the end of the season.'' A clip of her commentary was shared by the Leeds team Twitter account, which invited a slew of hateful messages toward Carney.  Many on Twitter defended her and criticized the team's social media folks, including the former Leeds captain Rio Ferdinand, who called for the tweet to be deleted.  Bethany England, a forward for Chelsea, called out Leeds' social media team for ''atrocious behaviour.''  ''Cyber bullying a female pundit and opening her up to mass online abuse for DOING HER JOB AND HAVING HER OPINION!'' England said.  In February, the top executives of the Football Association -- English soccer's governing body -- the Premier League, and other organizations wrote an open letter to Jack Dorsey, Twitter's chief executive, and Mark Zuckerberg, the C.E.O. of Facebook, calling for the leaders to put an end to ''the levels of vicious, offensive abuse'' coming from users on their platforms.  ''The reality is your platforms remain havens for abuse,'' the soccer executives wrote. ''Your inaction has created the belief in the minds of the anonymous perpetrators that they are beyond reach.''  In the past, Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter have taken steps, such as banning users temporarily or permanently, but the issues of online abuse have persisted.  In a news release announcing the social media boycott, which will take place from Friday afternoon through Monday, English soccer called on the United Kingdom to ''bring in strong legislation to make social media companies more accountable for what happens on their platforms.''  In the statement, Richard Masters, the Premier League's chief executive, said the league would continue to push social media companies to make changes to prevent online abuse.  ''Racist behaviour of any form is unacceptable and the appalling abuse we are seeing players receive on social media platforms cannot be allowed to continue,'' Masters said. ''Football is a diverse sport, which brings together communities and cultures from all backgrounds and this diversity makes the competition stronger.''  It's not the first time soccer has tried to shine a light on racism.  Players and coaches in the Premier League and other top leagues, for example, have been kneeling before kickoffs all season in a show of support for the Black Lives Matter movement -- at the encouragement of the league's team captains and with the support of league officials.  But some players and even entire teams, frustrated with a lack of concrete progress on racial issues and feeling the gesture has become more performative than productive, have recently stopped taking part.  Crystal Palace forward Wilfried Zaha said he had come to see the kneeling as ''degrading,'' and said he would stop doing it and would focus his efforts elsewhere. Brentford, a team in England's second-tier Championship, in February stopped taking a knee before games. While the players said in a statement that they still supported antiracism efforts, they said, ''We believe we can use our time and energies to promote racial equality in other ways.''  The social-media blackout will take place while an entire slate of games in multiple leagues will be played, including one between Manchester United and Liverpool, the Premier League's defending champion.  Edleen John, director of international relations for the Football Association, said English soccer will not stop pressing for change after next weekend.  ''It's simply unacceptable that people across English football and society more broadly continue to be subjected to discriminatory abuse online on a daily basis, with no real-world consequences for perpetrators,'' John said. ''Social media companies need to be held accountable if they continue to fall short of their moral and social responsibilities to address this endemic problem.''  In February, the Arsenal striker Eddie Nketiah posted a picture on Twitter with the caption, ''Working with a smile!'' It was met with racist abuse from a Twitter user who told him to leave the club. (PHOTOGRAPH BY via Twitter FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005w "
172		"    As Covid Ravages India, True Toll Is Undercounted  By Jeffrey Gettleman, Sameer Yasir, Hari Kumar, Suhasini Raj and Atul Loke  1,979 words 25 April 2021   1     NEW DELHI -- India's coronavirus second wave is rapidly sliding into a devastating crisis, with hospitals unbearably full, oxygen supplies running low, desperate people dying in line waiting to see doctors -- and mounting evidence that the actual death toll is far higher than officially reported.  Each day, the government reports more than 300,000 new infections, a world record, and India is now seeing more new infections than any other country by far, almost half of all new cases in a global surge.  But experts say those numbers, however staggering, represent just a fraction of the real reach of the virus's spread, which has thrown this country into emergency mode. Millions of people refuse to even step outside -- their fear of catching the virus is that extreme. Accounts from around the country tell of the sick being left to gasp for air as they wait at chaotic hospitals that are running out of lifesaving oxygen.  The sudden surge in recent weeks, with an insidious newer variant possibly playing a role, is casting increasing doubt on India's official Covid-19 death toll of nearly 200,000, with more than 2,000 people dying every day.  Interviews from cremation grounds across the country, where the fires never stop, portray an extensive pattern of deaths far exceeding the official figures. Nervous politicians and hospital administrators may be undercounting or overlooking large numbers of dead, analysts say. And grieving families may be hiding Covid connections as well, out of shame, adding to the confusion in this enormous nation of 1.4 billion.  ''It's a complete massacre of data,'' said Bhramar Mukherjee, an epidemiologist at the University of Michigan who has been following India closely. ''From all the modeling we've done, we believe the true number of deaths is two to five times what is being reported.''  At one of the large cremation grounds in Ahmedabad, a city in the western Indian state of Gujarat, bright orange fires light up the night sky, burning 24 hours a day, like an industrial plant that never shuts down. Suresh Bhai, a worker there, said he had never seen such a never-ending assembly line of death.  But he has not been writing down the cause of death as Covid-19 on the thin paper slips that he hands over to the mournful families, even though the number of dead is surging along with the virus.  ''Sickness, sickness, sickness,'' Mr. Suresh said. ''That's what we write.''  When asked why, he said it was what he had been instructed to do by his bosses, who did not respond to requests for comment.  On Saturday, officials reported nearly 350,000 new infections, and the deaths continued to rise. At one hospital in New Delhi, the capital, doctors said 20 patients in a critical care unit had died after oxygen pressure dropped. The doctors blamed the deaths on the city's acute oxygen shortage.  Months ago, India seemed to be doing remarkably well with the pandemic. After a harsh initial lockdown early last year was eased, the country did not register the frightening case-count and death numbers that sent other big countries into crisis mode. Many officials and ordinary citizens stopped taking precautions, acting as if the worst days were over.  Now, countless Indians are turning to social media to send out heartbreaking S.O.S. messages for a hospital bed, medicine, some oxygen to breathe. '''National Emergency,''' blared a banner headline in one of India's leading papers, The Hindustan Times. Across India, mass cremations are now taking place. Sometimes dozens of fires go up at once.  At the same time, India's Covid vaccine campaign is struggling: Less than 10 percent of Indians have gotten even one dose, despite India being the world's leading vaccine manufacturer. India's dire needs are already having ripple effects across the world, especially for poorer countries. It had planned to ship out millions of doses; now, given the country's stark vaccination shortfall, exports have essentially been shut down, leaving other nations with far fewer doses than they had expected.  Doctors worry that the runaway surge is being at least partly driven by the emergence of a virus variant known as the ''double mutant,'' B.1.617, because it contains genetic mutations found in two other difficult-to-control versions of the coronavirus. One of the mutations is present in the highly contagious variant that ripped through California earlier this year. The other mutation is similar to one found in the South African variant and believed to make the virus more resistant to vaccines.  Still, scientists caution it is too early to know for sure how pernicious the new variant emerging in India really is.  The result could be the worst of both worlds, faster-spreading and less controllable. This is worrying scientists around the globe, who see people starting to relax their guard in well-inoculated countries even as huge setbacks in India, Brazil and other places raise the likelihood that the coronavirus will mutate in ways that could outflank the current vaccines.  In Bhopal, a large city in central India that was the site of a catastrophic gas leak in the 1980s that killed thousands, residents say the cremation grounds haven't been as busy since that disaster.  Over 13 days in mid-April, Bhopal officials reported 41 deaths related to Covid-19. But a survey by The new_york_times of the city's main Covid-19 cremation and burial grounds, where bodies were being handled under strict protocols, revealed a total of more than 1,000 deaths during the same period.  ''Many deaths are not getting recorded and they are increasing every day,'' said Dr. G.C. Gautam, a cardiologist based in Bhopal. He said that officials were doing this because ''they don't want to create panic.''  The same phenomenon appeared to be happening in Lucknow and Mirzapur -- major cities in Uttar Pradesh State -- and across Gujarat, where, during a similar period in mid-April, the authorities reported between 73 and 121 Covid-related deaths each day.  But a detailed count compiled by one of Gujarat's leading newspapers, Sandesh, which sent reporters to cremation and burial grounds across the state, indicated that the number was several times higher, around 610 each day.  The biggest newspapers in India have seized on the discrepancies. ''COVID-19 deaths in Gujarat far exceed government figures,'' read a recent front-page headline in The Hindu.  India's population is, on average, much younger than in most Western nations. Experts say that is the most likely reason that deaths per million in India had seemed relatively low. But the number is quickly climbing.  According to excess mortality studies, Covid-19 deaths have been underestimated in many countries, including in the United States and Britain.  But India is a much bigger and poorer country. And its people are spread across 28 states and several federal territories in a highly decentralized system of governance, with different states counting deaths in different ways.  Even in a good year, experts say, only about one-fifth of deaths are medically investigated, meaning that the vast number of Indians die without a cause of death being certified.  According to the World Health Organization, a death should be recorded as Covid-19-related if the disease is assumed to have caused or contributed to it, even if the person had a pre-existing medical condition, such as cancer.  In many places in India, that doesn't seem to be happening.  Rupal Thakkar tested positive for Covid-19 in mid-April. On April 16, she was admitted to Shalby Limited, a private hospital in her home city of Ahmedabad, but her oxygen levels suddenly dropped. The next day Ms. Thakkar, 48, died.  The hospital listed her cause of death as ''sudden cardiac death,'' which left the Thakkar family outraged.  ''It was a lifetime shock,'' said her younger brother, Dipan Thakkar. ''Why would a private hospital connive with the government in hiding the real death numbers? It was an organized crime. It was an illegal act.''  Officials at Shalby didn't respond to requests for comment.  After her situation was widely publicized in Indian newspapers, the hospital issued a second death certificate, this time including Covid-19 as a contributing cause.  Some families don't want the truth to come out, said Dr. Mukherjee of the University of Michigan. Some want to cremate loved ones outside strict Covid-19 government protocols, and so they hide the fact that their family member died from the coronavirus. Others may feel ashamed about losing a loved one, as if it were their fault.  A political agenda may also be at play, experts said. States controlled by India's governing Bharatiya Janata Party, led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, may face pressure to underreport, according to some analysts. Dr. Mukherjee cited the very public scandal in 2019 when Mr. Modi's government tried to suppress data showing a rise in the unemployment rate.  When it comes to Covid data, she said, ''there is tremendous pressure from the central government on the state governments for projecting progress.''  Several officials from the governing party did not respond to messages seeking comment.  But manipulating death numbers seems to be happening in other places, too. One example is the state of Chhattisgarh, in central India, which is run by the leading opposition party, Congress.  Officials in Chhattisgarh's Durg district, home to a large steel plant, reported more than 150 Covid-19 deaths from April 15 to April 21, according to messages sent to local media that were seen by The Times. The state reported less than half that number for Durg.  Chhattisgarh's health minister, T.S. Singh Deo, denied any intentional underreporting. ''We have tried to be as transparent as humanly possible,'' he said. ''We stand to be corrected at any point in time.''  Cremations are an important part of Hindu burial rituals, seen as a way to free the soul from the body. Those working at the burning grounds said they were utterly exhausted and could never remember so many people dying in such a short span of time.  In Surat, an industrial city in Gujarat, the grills used to burn bodies have been operating so relentlessly that the iron on some has actually melted. On April 14, Covid-19 crematories in Surat and another district, Gandhi Nagar, told The Times that they cremated 124 people, on a day when the authorities said 73 had died of Covid-19 in the entire state.  In Kanpur, in Uttar Pradesh State, bodies are now being burned in some of the city's parks; the crematories are that backed up.  In Ahmedabad, at the Vadaj crematory, huge smokestacks pump out black smoke. Mr. Suresh, a clerk, sits in a tiny office, the door closed firmly shut.  When reached by telephone, he said he put ''beemari,'' or sickness in Hindi, on all the death certificates, and he referred questions to a sanitation official who then referred questions to another official who declined to answer calls.  Mr. Suresh said that his crematory handled 15 to 20 bodies of Covid-19 patients every day. As he spoke on Friday, three bodies burned on separate pyres, next to a large and growing stack of freshly chopped wood.  Cremating the remains of people who died from Covid-19 in East Delhi on Friday. India now accounts for almost half of all new coronavirus cases reported worldwide. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE new_york_times) (A1); Mourning outside a hospital in Delhi. Politicians and hospital administrators may be undercounting Covid-19 deaths, analysts say. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE new_york_times) (A8)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005v "
173		"    We Need Many More Vaccines  By The Editorial Board  1,537 words 25 April 2021   6     Wealthy nations have to step up.  Low- and middle-income nations are facing an unconscionable shortage of coronavirus vaccines that threatens to upend progress against the pandemic.  So far, this global shortage has been obscured by pockets of vaccine abundance in wealthier countries like the United States. But if the shortage isn't addressed soon, the trouble will become all too clear. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people will continue to get sick and die, even as the pandemic recedes in richer nations. The most fragile economies will continue to teeter, and gains made elsewhere will eventually be imperiled: The longer the virus spreads, the greater the chance it mutates into something even more contagious, deadly or vaccine-resistant.  It's tempting to peg this disparity to recent questions raised about some of the vaccines. Rare but deadly blood clots have been linked to the vaccines made by AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson. The former has never been approved for use in the United States, and administration of the latter was paused by American officials while an advisory committee formulated recommendations for how to proceed safely.  It's true that such precautions are a luxury of wealthy nations that have other options to fall back on, and that they risk tainting the public perception of the few vaccines low-income countries have been able to get. But the underlying problems of both vaccine hesitancy and vaccine shortages run much deeper than any one issue.  Nearly as soon as vaccines entered clinical trials, wealthy countries began hoarding doses, ensuring that instead of the most vulnerable people everywhere being vaccinated, their residents would be first in line.  Then, as the vaccines came to market, some vaccine makers insisted on sweeping liability protections that further imperiled access for poorer countries. The United States, for example, is prohibited from selling or donating its unused doses, as Vanity Fair has reported, because the strong liability protections that drugmakers enjoy here don't extend to other countries. (The Biden administration recently circumvented this stricture when it classified the vaccines it gave to Mexico and Canada as ''loans,'' but that's a cumbersome workaround that creates further confusion and delay.)  In other countries, Pfizer has reportedly not only sought liability protection against all civil claims -- even those that could result from the company's own negligence -- but has asked governments to put up sovereign assets, including their bank reserves, embassy buildings and military bases, as collateral against lawsuits. Some countries have understandably balked at such demands, according to the nonprofit Bureau of Investigative Journalism, and the pace of purchasing agreements has slowed as a result.  As they find themselves shut out of vaccine procurement, those same nations have also found that they cannot make the shots themselves. Companies and countries are hoarding both raw materials and technical expertise, and have prevented poorer nations from suspending patents despite international treaties that allow for such measures in emergencies.  There is no shortage of solutions to these problems, but the countries with leverage, clout and excess supply -- like the United States -- need to act now, in the following ways:  Stop hoarding doses. The richest nations account for 16 percent of the global population but hold 53 percent of all purchased coronavirus doses, according to the Duke-Margolis Center for Health Policy. The United States is projected to have 300 million extra shots by late July, even after accounting for the supply needed to vaccinate the millions of children who are expected to be eligible by the end of the year.  The Biden administration has already arranged to send four million unused shots to Mexico and Canada. That's a welcome course correction, but the nation can and should give more. In separate reports, the Duke-Margolis Center and the Center for Strategic and International Studies have laid out a roster of options for doing so without imperiling the nation's own vaccination efforts. Their suggestions include delaying some orders long enough for other countries to go first; donating more excess doses to Covax, the global cooperative working to pool vaccine resources; and using existing global health networks such as the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, known as PEPFAR, to expedite shipments to countries facing the greatest need.  The Biden administration should consider employing all of these measures, and should also renegotiate its contracts with vaccine makers so that such dose transfers no longer have to be masked as loans. The administration has several bargaining chips with which to effect such changes, including a federally held patent on a crucial component of the Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccines that the government has not yet demanded full royalties for.  Suspend patents. Nearly 60 nations have petitioned the World Trade Organization to allow countries to temporarily override intellectual property rights for coronavirus-related drugs and vaccines, but so far the measure is languishing. The Biden administration should support this waiver, nudge vaccine makers into voluntary licensing agreements and help build the public-private partnerships needed to bring those agreements to fruition. It should also press companies to offer better deals to the countries trying to secure doses -- no more absurd indemnity clauses that protect company profits over human lives.  Share technology and resources. More than eight months ago, the World Health Organization established a technology access pool where companies and countries could share their technology and expertise with governments trying to scale up vaccine manufacturing. The Biden administration signaled its willingness to participate in this effort back in January, but so far, the National Institutes of Health has not joined in, nor have the major vaccine makers. That needs to change quickly.  The administration should also lift any embargoes resulting from its use of the Defense Production Act. President Biden was wise to use this law to bolster domestic vaccine production, but that move has also prevented companies from exporting raw materials. As a result, production lines in India and elsewhere are at risk of shutting down for want of key ingredients available in the United States. The administration could help keep those facilities running by lifting those strictures.  Build more capacity. Experts say that virtually no vaccines are being manufactured in Africa and that very few are being made in Latin America. The reasons for this shortcoming are complex -- a longstanding underinvestment in regional capacity combined with an overreliance on multinational corporations. But the solutions to it are clear. Britain has managed to scale up its manufacturing capacity from just two plants at the start of the pandemic to four now, with two more under construction. There's no reason the same can't be done in other countries where the need is even greater. Throwing his weight behind such an effort could be one of Mr. Biden's most enduring legacies.  Another good step would be to support the global pandemic preparedness treaty that the W.H.O. is urging, which, among other things, aims to strengthen manufacturing capacity around the world.  Invest in alternatives. As miraculous as the current coronavirus vaccines are, they come with downsides. The mRNA shots have complicated storage requirements. The ones that rely on adenovirus vector technology -- those made by AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson -- have been linked to rare but potentially deadly side effects. What's more, there are not enough of any of these, or of all of them combined, to meet the world's needs. Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America alone will need nearly four billion shots of any two-dose vaccine. So far, only 1.3 billion coronavirus vaccines, of any kind, have been made at all.  Fortunately, there are other promising alternatives in the offing. One of them is based on the same technology used to make the hepatitis B vaccine that's been in use for nearly 40 years. This coronavirus vaccine is cheap and easy to make, its early clinical data looks good and its creators -- Dr. Peter Hotez and Maria Bottazzi at the Baylor College of Medicine -- have no plans to patent it. If the United States put half as much weight behind this simple technology as it put behind the mRNA vaccines, manufacturers could churn out billions of doses of it in fairly short order.  No country has cleared every hurdle to vaccinating its entire population. In the United States as much as anywhere, vaccine hesitancy persists and some especially vulnerable populations, like the homebound and unhoused, remain hard to reach even as supply increases. But the world cannot afford to wait for all of those problems to be solved in one country before it works to make coronavirus vaccines more available to all countries. The global vaccine gap is a matter of life and death, and all nations should be working to close it as quickly as possible.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIRAGEC/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005u "
174		"    Volatile and Vengeful: The Rudin Approach to Show Business  By Michael Paulson and Cara Buckley  4,698 words 25 April 2021   1     Scott Rudin has long been one of the most celebrated and powerful producers in Hollywood and, especially, on Broadway -- an EGOT who won an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar and 17 Tony Awards while developing a reputation as one of the vilest bosses in the industry.  Respected for his taste and talent -- with films like ''The Social Network'' and ''No Country for Old Men'' and shows including ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' and ''The Book of Mormon'' -- he is also known within the entertainment world for terrorizing underlings, hurling staplers, cellphones, mugs and other improvised projectiles in moments of rage.  But the abuse of assistants is just a small part of the way he has wielded his power.  He has a reputation for being vengeful: After a dispute with an agent over airfare, he allegedly pressured some of the agent's clients to leave him. He is litigious: He sued an insurance company seeking an enormous payout after he blamed the closing of a musical on the pregnancy of a star, Audra McDonald. And he can be callous: When Rita Wilson, who was starring in one of his plays, told him that she had breast cancer, she said, he lamented that she would need to take time off during Tony voting season.  ''He's like a mafia boss,'' said the playwright Adam Rapp, whose play ''The Sound Inside'' was unceremoniously dumped by Mr. Rudin when Mr. Rapp refused to part with the agent with whom Mr. Rudin was feuding. ''If he breaks his leg, other people suffer.''  Now, though, the 62-year-old producer is facing a reckoning. An article this month in The Hollywood Reporter detailing his long history of bullying assistants prompted an outcry, leading Mr. Rudin to announce that he would step back from ''active participation'' in his projects on Broadway, in Hollywood, and in London's West End. And, in written responses to questions for this article, he said he was ''profoundly sorry'' for his behavior and revealed that he is resigning from the Broadway League, which is the trade association of producers and theater owners.  ''I know apologizing is not, by any means, enough,'' he said. ''In stepping back, I intend to work on my issues and do so fully aware that many will feel that this is too little and too late.''  For decades Mr. Rudin had largely escaped consequences for his behavior. Established and emerging artists flocked to him, in part because of his appetite for artistically ambitious (and often award-winning) work. But he also benefited from his reputation for ruthlessness: Many of those harmed by his wrath have been afraid of retaliation if they speak out.  The current backlash against his behavior -- on Thursday he was denounced at a march for change on Broadway -- has left Mr. Rudin an immobilized impresario just as Broadway is preparing to put tickets back on sale following a lengthy pandemic shutdown. Mr. Rudin, who had been set to play a key role in theater's post-Covid comeback as one of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo's advisers on reopening, finds himself sidelined.  Even some of his biggest backers say he needs to change.  ''He's had a bad temper,'' said the billionaire David Geffen, who alongside his fellow mogul Barry Diller has been co-producing Mr. Rudin's recent Broadway shows, ''and he clearly needs to do anger management or something like that.''  The new_york_times interviewed dozens of actors, writers, agents, producers, investors and office assistants who have worked with Mr. Rudin, examined financial records of his stage shows and reviewed court papers from his many legal disputes. What emerged confirmed much of what was detailed by The Hollywood Reporter and provided a fuller picture of how he used and abused power, not only in his offices, but also as he alternately cultivated and castigated colleagues at all levels of the entertainment industry.  ''There's always, with Scott, two sides to the coin, depending on what he wants,'' said Robert Fox, a British producer who collaborated with Mr. Rudin for a decade until, as happens with many of Mr. Rudin's relationships, the two had a contentious falling out. ''He can treat people impeccably well, or disgracefully badly, and there's not much in between.''  After Mr. Rudin's decades of dominance, his comeuppance -- if that's what it is -- arrives as the entertainment industry is contemplating a post-pandemic future that many hope will look different from the past.  'It's crazy that so many in the industry know about it.'  The Rudin employee handbook, distributed to new staffers, outlines strict rules of conduct. ''Rude, offensive or outrageous behavior'' is verboten. Co-workers must treat one another with ''patience, respect and consideration.'' Be courteous and helpful. Don't send angry or rude emails.  But employees swiftly learned that there was one person to whom those rules did not apply: the boss.  Mistakes, real and imagined, sent Mr. Rudin into a rage -- an incorrect font (he insists on Garamond), a misspelled name, an unwiped conference table.  Mr. Rudin routinely screamed and swore: ''Why are you so stupid?'' ''You're a hopeless idiot.'' ''A clown car is running this office.'' ''You're a pathetic loser.''  Former employees said he threw things at walls, at windows, at the ground, and, occasionally, toward subordinates.  In 2018 he sent a glass bowl airborne, shattering it against a conference room wall, according to several people who were there; another time he smashed a computer on an employee's hand, several ex-employees said. A former assistant, Jonathan Bogush, said he saw Mr. Rudin hurl a plateful of chicken salad into another assistant's face when he worked there in 2003.  Sometimes frightened assistants hid in the kitchen or a closet to escape his wrath.  Some assistants kept spare phones to replace those that got destroyed when thrown by Mr. Rudin. There were also extra laptops -- to replace those he broke -- and his contact list was backed up to a master computer nicknamed the Dragon.  His behavior prompted outrage after it was described earlier this month in The Hollywood Reporter. It had also been described, to less effect, in multiple other accounts over the years.  Mr. Rudin offered both an apology and a bit of pushback to the stories being told about him as a boss. ''While I believe some of the stories that have been made public recently are not accurate, I am aware of how inappropriate certain of my behaviors have been and the effects of those behaviors on other people,'' he said. ''I am not proud of these actions.''  In the fall of 2018, Mr. Rudin's employees gathered for harassment prevention training. The producer had a simple but revealing question for the trainer.  ''He said, 'You can get up in their face, right?''' said Caroline Rugo, then working as the office manager's assistant, reading from notes she said she took at the meeting. '''And you can yell, right, just as long as you don't make physical contact?''' (Mr. Rudin disputed that description, saying, ''I asked for a series of specific definitions of harassment for the much younger people on the staff.'')  At Mr. Rudin's prepandemic Times Square offices -- which he moved out of last summer -- he often holed up in a conference room. Two assistants described a sign on the door: ''Turn around. Do not come in. There is nothing here for you.''  For some, this was Tinsel Town boot camp, a place to gain irreplaceable insight into the entertainment world. Many former assistants have risen in the Hollywood ranks, and credit Scott Rudin Productions with versing them in the ways of the industry. They laud Mr. Rudin's perfectionism, his acumen, instincts -- ''a golden gut,'' said one -- and his relentless work ethic. Some former assistants defended him, saying that employees were always warned that the job was high stress, and suggesting that he was becoming a fall guy for widespread bad behavior in show business.  But more than two dozen ex-employees shared memories of colleagues being excoriated: An intern receptionist was fired for moving too slowly to alert maintenance about a flickering ceiling light. A publicist sat quaking as Mr. Rudin punched the wall. An employee was fired for falling asleep while working late. Another was kicked out of a car on a highway after mispronouncing a name (the vehicle first pulled to the shoulder). An office manager was taken away by ambulance after having a panic attack.  Mr. Rudin was especially hard on female assistants, according to nearly a dozen former employees, chastising and firing them with greater frequency. Ms. Rugo said Mr. Rudin was more likely to chat with male interns, and more likely to demand that female interns clean the conference room.  Many wondered how artists who consider themselves politically enlightened could be so eager to work with Mr. Rudin, knowing how badly he treated his employees.  ''People are acting like the industry is changing, but the fact that someone like Scott is still in power makes me doubtful of that,'' said Josh Arnon, 25, who worked at Mr. Rudin's office from October 2018 to August 2019. ''It's crazy that so many in the industry know about it and nothing has changed.''  'He's a very volatile man. Very, very volatile.'  Over a decades-long career, Mr. Rudin built a reputation as a tastemaker admired for his skill at harnessing the talent and the money to present adventurous work too risky for most other commercial producers, often to critical acclaim. Actors, writers, directors and designers have happily worked with him again and again, saying he can be charming, insightful and supportive.  In Hollywood, as the industry gravitated toward franchises and reboots, he moved toward indie fare; among his most notable recent films have been ''Lady Bird,'' ''Isle of Dogs'' and ''Uncut Gems.'' On Broadway, he has been the most prolific producer: Over the last 15 years, he has been a lead producer on 36 shows, mostly starry productions of serious plays, but also the megahit ''Book of Mormon,'' which has grossed a whopping $659 million on Broadway over its decade-long run.  He has had a knack for bridging the worlds of theater and film, luring movie stars to Broadway and finding film jobs for stage actors, directors and writers. His productions have starred a who's who of entertainment, including Denzel Washington, Larry David, Chris Rock, Michelle Williams and Laurie Metcalf.  But he has also racked up a long list of people who have had enough.  ''He's super-bright, he's incredibly motivated, he has really good taste, and he can be incredibly good company,'' said Mr. Fox, who co-produced films (''The Hours'') and plays (''Skylight'') with Mr. Rudin. ''But he's also very controlling -- and became more so as the years wore on -- and I don't believe anyone could put their hand up and say they weren't aware that he treated his staff really badly.''  ''He's a very volatile man,'' Mr. Fox added. ''Very, very volatile.''  Mr. Rudin expresses that volatility not only verbally, but also in writing -- he's known for sending vitriolic emails, and often copying others. Amanda Lundberg, chief executive of the publicity firm 42West, recalled being copied on an email in which he described another woman using a vulgar synonym for vagina. ''He wanted an audience to his cruel berating,'' she said.  ''I feel embarrassment for the many that not only did have the power to stand up to him and walk away, but chose to gleefully and dutifully protect him instead,'' she added. ''Everyone knows who they are.''  A few actors and writers who worked with Mr. Rudin have begun to share stories about his bad behavior.  In 2015, Ms. Wilson learned she had breast cancer while starring in a Rudin production of Larry David's play ''Fish in the Dark.'' When she told Mr. Rudin the news, she said, he complained that she would need time off during Tony voting season and asked to see her medical records, while Anna Shapiro, the director, grew upset about having to find a replacement.  A few days later, as she was about to go onstage, Ms. Wilson received a call from her agent, saying her surgeon needed to call the insurance adjuster immediately, per Mr. Rudin's demands. The memory still pains her.  ''I felt like he was trying to find a way to fire me legally,'' Ms. Wilson said. ''He is the kind of person who makes someone feel worthless, unvaluable and replaceable.''  Ms. Shapiro said she had been trying to be helpful and had immediately apologized when it became clear that she had unintentionally upset Ms. Wilson; Rick Miramontez, a spokesman for Mr. Rudin, said that Mr. Rudin's recollection was that Ms. Wilson had wanted to open the show and then leave, but that he and the director had not wanted her to delay treatment. Ms. Wilson stayed in the play -- another actor performed her part during her time off -- and today is cancer free.  'She just got whipsawed, and it was wrong.'  It was early 2019, and ''West Side Story'' still didn't have its Maria or its Anita.  The production scheduled an audition in New York -- not unusual, except that the show's Belgian director and choreographer were both in Europe.  Mr. Rudin demanded that the agent they both used, Mark Subias, pick up their airfare, and when the agent refused, Mr. Rudin began to threaten -- to fire the director, to cancel the production, to damage the agent's career, according to five people told of the incident. (Mr. Subias declined to comment.)  In the end, Mr. Rudin stuck with the show, which opened to sharply divided reviews and packed houses.  But Mr. Rudin said he wouldn't work with Mr. Subias's clients, and then dropped planned projects with some of them.  Among those affected, according to several people familiar with the incident: the playwright Sarah Ruhl. Mr. Rudin had planned to bring her next play, ''Becky Nurse of Salem,'' to Broadway, with Sam Gold as the director and Kathy Bates as the star. Mr. Rudin reportedly told Ms. Ruhl to drop her agent; when she refused, he dropped her play.  Ms. Bates and Mr. Gold both left the project, and instead of going to Broadway the play wound up at Berkeley Repertory Theater in California; its next stop is supposed to be at one of Lincoln Center Theater's Off Broadway venues in 2022. Both theaters are prestigious, but they are less visible and pay less well than Broadway. (Ms. Ruhl declined to comment.)  ''It was so sad that Sarah Ruhl became the victim of this battle,'' said Susie Medak, the managing director of Berkeley Rep, who confirmed the change to the show's team. ''There are so few women presented on Broadway, and here was an opportunity to have a Broadway show that was so lovely, and had such a starring role for this actress, and to have that fall apart over this totally unnecessary battle between these two guys was a truly unfortunate episode. She just got whipsawed, and it was wrong.''  Also affected: Mr. Rapp, the playwright. Mr. Rudin had pledged to bring his play, ''The Sound Inside,'' to Broadway, he said. When Mr. Rapp refused to drop Mr. Subias as his agent, Mr. Rudin dropped the production, he added. The producer Jeffrey Richards stepped in to present it on Broadway last season, and now it is a Tony nominee for best play.  Mr. Rudin acknowledged the rift with Mr. Subias, which he attributed to a ''very, very costly situation'' involving a disagreement over dates, and said: ''I felt I had no choice but to stop doing business with him. We have since moved past the issue.''  Investors are frustrated. Enter the billionaires.  The lavishly nostalgic 2017 Broadway production of ''Hello, Dolly!'' was a can't-miss event: a beloved Bette Midler chewing the scenery in a musical with lots of it.  Tickets sold fast -- especially for the weeks when Ms. Midler was performing -- and fetched eye-popping prices, topping out at $998 during a holiday week.  Investors in the show were gleeful, as huge advance sales, boffo grosses and top-tier prices suggested a monster hit. But, in the end, they made only a tiny profit, and many are now grumbling.  ''I've invested in a bunch of Rudin shows,'' said Gabby Hanna, a Cape Cod real estate agent who said she put $50,000 into ''Dolly'' and made only a $5,000 profit, ''and after 'Dolly' I said I would never do it again.''  Over the last 15 years, Mr. Rudin has raised about $200 million from a variety of investors to finance his stage shows, according to a review of Securities and Exchange Commission filings for each show. But some investors have grown frustrated with his big-spending, low-return track record: Over the last five years, about three-quarters of his Broadway shows have lost money, according to a review of recoupment and closing announcements and discussions with industry leaders.  ''Dolly'' investors said in interviews that they had no way of really understanding why their returns were low -- very little financial data was shared with them -- but some said they believed Mr. Rudin had compensated Ms. Midler so generously, spent so heavily on marketing, and kept so much for himself that there was little left to share with them.  Mr. Rudin said suggestions that he spent too much on himself were ''not true.''  ''I have repeatedly (on nearly every show) at various points given up hundreds upon hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees owed to myself to keep shows running,'' he said, ''and I have spent on top of that millions of my own money keeping shows running.''  ''Dolly'' cost $16 million to put together and ran for 76 weeks, selling 811,203 tickets for a total of $128 million, according to financial filings and the Broadway League. The show's weekly expenses were high -- as much as $1.2 million -- and opening night, which included a star-studded party at the New York Public Library, cost $842,000, according to documents filed with the New York state attorney general's office.  Several ''Dolly'' investors said their disappointment was compounded because they had felt pressured to also put money into Mr. Rudin's plays that spring -- a revival of ''The Glass Menagerie'' and a new play called ''A Doll's House, Part 2,'' both of which closed early after performing poorly at the box office.  Some of the investors are now closely watching litigation between Mr. Rudin and SpotCo, a marketing firm that claims in a pending lawsuit that he owes the company $6.3 million. (Mr. Rudin's lawyer said the case had no merit when it was filed last summer.)  Recently, Mr. Rudin found a way to avoid dealing with smaller investors: He turned to a pair of billionaires, Mr. Diller and Mr. Geffen, to finance his stage shows. Mr. Diller, the chairman of IAC/InterActiveCorp, was once Mr. Rudin's boss at 20th Century Fox, while Mr. Geffen is a longtime record industry and film executive and a patron of the arts.  In interviews last week, both men said that Mr. Rudin's behavior was a problem but held out hope that he would change.  ''I don't condone, nor am I an apologist for, actions relating to his work in his personal office,'' Mr. Diller said, adding that he thought that ''separate and special consideration'' should be given ''to his work outside of that office.''  Mr. Geffen said that Mr. Rudin has ''a psychological problem that he needs to deal with if he's going to work in the future.''  And would Mr. Geffen work with him again?  ''If his behavior didn't change it would be an easy no,'' Mr. Geffen said, but, he added, ''I don't think a death sentence is called for if he gets the help he needs and his behavior changes.''  In an era of outspokenness, many artists remain silent.  Mr. Rudin has made strenuous efforts to prevent people from talking about him, not just through intimidation, but also as a prolific user of nondisclosure agreements.  Confidentiality agreements reviewed by The Times bar employees from cooperating with interviews about him, and prohibit disclosing ''any aspect of any activity occurring at, in, or about any home, office, or other property owned, occupied, or used by Scott Rudin or any of his family members.'' And a provision in the operating agreement for some of his shows bars investors from making ''negative remarks.''  In essays this week, two artists who have worked with Mr. Rudin, Tavi Gevinson and Michael Chabon, have reflected on not pushing back against what they knew about his behavior.  But many of his powerful collaborators have declined to respond to inquiries about him. Among them: actors including Mr. Washington, Ms. Metcalf and Jennifer Lawrence; the directors Wes Anderson, the Coen brothers, Noah Baumbach, Greta Gerwig and Alex Garland; the writers Aaron Sorkin and Lucas Hnath; and the former studio executive Amy Pascal, as well as the studios that Mr. Rudin has recently been working with, A24 and FX Productions.  Some of Mr. Rudin's battles have become public through the legal system -- he has been sued by Stephen Sondheim (over the rights to a musical) and the estates of Harper Lee (over the fidelity of the ''Mockingbird'' adaptation) and Tennessee Williams (over unpaid royalties).  He battled an insurance company over losses from a musical after attributing its closing to the unexpected pregnancy of one of its stars, Ms. McDonald, which led to lengthy wrangling over who knew what about her reproductive health. That case was settled last year. (Ms. McDonald declined to comment.)  He demanded that theaters around the country cancel productions of ''To Kill a Mockingbird,'' saying they might compete with the Broadway version. (After a backlash, he offered a face-saving compromise.)  And his pique has manifested in other ways as well. In the summer of 2017, a representative of ''1984,'' a play produced by Mr. Rudin, barred a Tony nominator, Jose Antonio Vargas, from watching the show. Mr. Vargas said he was already inside the theater, holding a valid ticket, when a member of the show's staff ordered him out. (Mr. Rudin did not dispute the episode, but said he ''had a very unfortunate incident with him years before'' when Mr. Vargas was working as a journalist.)  'Your actions have made it impossible for us to keep working together.'  Now Mr. Rudin's standing is damaged and his future is in doubt. At stake are a dizzying array of prestige projects, including one of the most highly anticipated productions planned for Broadway's first post-pandemic season: a gold-plated revival of ''The Music Man'' starring Hugh Jackman and Sutton Foster that is supposed to start previews in December.  Some collaborators are distancing themselves from him. Matt Stone, a ''South Park'' creator who is one of the writers of ''The Book of Mormon,'' said in an interview that he and the producer Anne Garefino had given Mr. Rudin an ultimatum before the producer announced his plan to step back. ''I said, 'Your actions have made it impossible for us to keep working together,''' Mr. Stone said.  Mr. Jackman and Ms. Foster have each said, in the wake of Mr. Rudin's announcement, that they were committed to a healthy workplace at ''The Music Man'' and were pleased that Mr. Rudin had stepped away. (Both declined interview requests.)  Mr. Rudin, asked about the role others had played in his decision, said, ''I resigned from the shows so that nobody would have to defend me or defend working with me -- the decisions were mine and were based on my desire to see the shows go forward.''  Mr. Rudin had many other projects planned before his behavior started to catch up with him. He was developing Broadway revivals of ''Our Town'' starring Dustin Hoffman, ''The Piano Lesson'' starring Samuel L. Jackson, and ''Death of a Salesman'' starring Nathan Lane. He was also planning a dance-focused new show with the acclaimed choreographer Justin Peck; a new Adam Guettel musical; and ''The Black Clown,'' Michael Schachter and Davóne Tines's musical adaptation of the Langston Hughes poem.  The fate of those projects, and of several films Mr. Rudin had planned to produce, is now unclear, and there are many unanswered questions. What will ''stepping back'' look like for Mr. Rudin, who is famous for micromanaging?  Mr. Rudin did not address those specifics, including about whether he would continue to benefit financially from his shows, but said that he hoped that his shows that were running before the pandemic -- ''The Book of Mormon,'' ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' and ''West Side Story'' -- would reopen. ''Other producers will replace me on these shows, and they will have decision making responsibilities that were heretofore mine,'' he said.  On Broadway, his absence could create opportunities for other producers, who have often been stymied by his propensity to lock up stories, stars, and even theater space.  ''You couldn't get a theater because you were always being played off against what he might have going in,'' Mr. Fox said, ''and that was really difficult for people who didn't produce the mass of product he did.''  And then there are the rights Mr. Rudin had obtained to stage play revivals, new work and adaptations from books and films. He would sometimes secure rights ''literally so other people can't produce them, because he would only want his touch on them,'' said Max Hoffman, 24, who worked for Mr. Rudin for nine months last year.  He left, he said, because he feared the job would cause him to have ''a mental breakdown.''  And Mr. Rudin's next steps? ''I am doing the work to become a better person and address my issues,'' he said in the statement to The Times. ''Beyond that commitment, anything else would be far too early to contemplate.''  NO COUNTRY FOR OLD MEN: Javier Bardem, Mr. Rudin and the directors and writers the Coen brothers won Oscars in 2008. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIRAMAX FILMS/PARAMOUNT VANTAGE); LADY BIRD: Saoirse Ronan, left, and Laurie Metcalf starred in the 2017 film written and directed by Greta Gerwig. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MERIE WALLACE/A24, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS); SHUFFLE ALONG: Mr. Rudin sued an insurer after blaming the musical's close on the pregnancy of Audra McDonald, center. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARA KRULWICH/THE new_york_times); A Difference In Treatment: Caroline Rugo, who worked as the office manager's assistant for Mr. Rudin, said he was more likely to chat with male interns, and more likely to demand that female interns clean the conference room. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROZETTE RAGO FOR THE new_york_times) (A22); Closing Doors: Mr. Rudin said he would step back from his projects on Broadway and in Hollywood and London. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTA SCHLUETER FOR THE new_york_times) (A22-A23); THE BOOK OF MORMON: Josh Gad, center left, and Andrew Rannells. Mr. Rudin, as producer, won a Tony for best musical.; HELLO, DOLLY!: Bette Midler brought in huge grosses in 2017, but investors saw tiny profits and blame Mr. Rudin.; TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD: Mr. Rudin's 2018 production began with litigation involving the estate of Harper Lee. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARA KRULWICH/THE new_york_times); A March On Broadway: ''Scott Rudin has got to go'' was chanted on Thursday during a demonstration for change in the theater industry. It passed the Winter Garden Theater, where ''The Music Man'' is to open in 2022, without Mr. Rudin. but investors saw tiny profits and blame Mr. Rudin. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE new_york_times); Looking For Change: ''It's crazy that so many in the industry know about it and nothing has changed,'' said Josh Arnon, who worked in Mr. Rudin's office. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VINCENT TULLO FOR THE new_york_times) (A23)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005q "
175		"   House & Home/ Reserve a Campsite, Even at the Last Minute  By Megan Michelson  1,703 words 25 April 2021   6     Who says you can't get a reservation for the great outdoors this weekend?  Pretend it's a Monday in midsummer. You live in or near a big city, a few hours from mountains or forests, and you want to go camping this coming weekend -- a few days away. Before the pandemic, that may have been possible. But these days the outdoors and camping are having their biggest boom since humans lived in caves, and finding a last-minute campsite is about as hard as spotting wild glowing mushrooms.  ''With the onset of Covid, it seems as though everyone went out and bought an R.V.,'' said Greg Query, owner of a Kampgrounds of America (KOA) campground in Estes Park, Colo., on the outskirts of Rocky Mountain National Park.  Public and private campgrounds were already seeing nationwide campsite shortages before Covid-19 because of a growing interest in outdoor activities. A 2019 North American Camping Report, from KOA, found that 7.2 million households in the United States started camping in the previous five years, bringing the total number to 78.8 million, a new high.  Many of those campers headed straight to national parks: A study from the research organization Resources for the Future in 2018 found that national park campsite reservations routinely are snatched up six months in advance, and places like Zion and Yosemite National Parks are frequently at 100 percent capacity.  The pandemic brought an influx of people looking to get away from it all. A May 2020 study from KOA reported that one-third of recreational travelers who had never camped before were interested in camping, many of whom are expected to return this summer.  ''Campgrounds across the country near popular spots are going to be heavily booked this summer,'' Mr. Query said. ''Luck is going to play a big factor in whether or not you get a campsite for the weekend.''  So, what to do if you get a last-minute urge to camp near, say, San Francisco? Sure, popular campgrounds at Yosemite National Park or Big Sur are entirely booked (and have been for months). But all is not lost -- the outdoors is not closed.  Hipcamp -- which works with mostly private landowners to rent campsites on everything from ranches to vineyards -- added 6,500 campsites across the United States to its booking site this March alone, and it recently partnered with California State Parks to show real-time availability data at state-run campgrounds.  ''I'm not the kind of person who books campsites six months in advance. That's why I started Hipcamp,'' said Alyssa Ravasio, founder and the chief executive of Hipcamp. ''Often, we'll have a campsite for you that just got created in the last few months. We have these incredible properties just opening up.''  So, if you want to camp this weekend, but didn't reserve a site in November, it's still possible to sleep under the stars. Here's how, in an easy step-by-step process.  Don't forget about private campgrounds.  Step 1: Go online and search for last-minute campsites on both public and private land. Reserve America and recreation.gov hold the keys to most state and federally managed campgrounds. If the site you want is booked, look for recommended campgrounds nearby.  Don't overlook privately owned campgrounds like KOAs or landowners who rent their land to campers on Hipcamp, Tentrr or Harvest Hosts. Though you can't book spots directly, Campendium and The Dyrt show campsites via handy maps -- everything from family-owned R.V. parks to state parks to legal dispersed camping zones in the area you're hoping to go.  Another private-land option is glamping -- think canvas tents, tree-houses or vintage trailers -- that offer outdoor spaces and rustic accommodations, as well as a comfy bed and hot showers. GlampingHub, Campspot or Airbnb (search ''unique stays'' like yurts or dome houses under filters) are good places to start. Or check out the multiple locations across the country of glamping resorts like Under Canvas, AutoCamp or Wander Camp.  ''You can find some cool and creative lodging that gives you the feel of being at a campsite, with hammocks and outdoor fire pits, but with a few extra amenities,'' said Chaya Harris, program director at Outdoor Afro, a community network for Black Americans that organizes camping and other outdoor activities. ''It'll still feel like an adventure and there's more availability.''  Look for first-come-first-served sites.  Let's say you struck out with booking a last-minute private-land spot to pitch a tent. That's OK. Next up, looking for campsites that can't be reserved ahead of time. Many state parks and some national park campgrounds maintain a number of first-come-first-served sites that are held for walk-up users on the day of.  RVShare, a peer-to-peer R.V. rental site, keeps a list of first-come-first-served campsites around the country. Or book a deluxe camper van rental from Moterra, which has four pickup locations around the West, or from Vermont Adventure Vans, out of Burlington. Those van outfitters can often help with custom trip planning; they may be able to recommend first-come-first-served campsites along your route.  Once you find a campground that doesn't take reservations, keep it in mind for future last-minute trips. For instance, the 10 public campgrounds on Tioga Pass (including Tioga Lake Campground and Saddlebag Lake Campground) outside the lesser-visited Tuolumne Meadows entrance to Yosemite National Park do not take reservations.  Neither does the riverfront Salmon River Campground near Stanley, Idaho, or the lakefront Dockery Lake Campground in Dahlonega, Ga., less than two hours from Atlanta. All of the backcountry shelters run by the Appalachian Mountain Club in the White Mountains of New Hampshire are also first come first served.  Most of these no-reservation spots in popular areas fill up in the morning, so get there early and plan to wait around until a site is vacant. ''If you have flexibility, come midweek or come early in the day,'' said Ms. Harris, of Outdoor Afro. ''Show up on a Friday afternoon and you'll just spend the evening driving around in circles looking for a spot.''  Skip the campground; go dispersed camping.  Dispersed camping means sleeping for free on public land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (B.L.M.) or the U.S. Forest Service. The B.L.M. has online maps and guidelines for how and where to camp on public lands. It's not for everyone, and it's not available everywhere. Be sure to read up on local land-use restrictions regarding camping and be familiar with ''leave no trace'' principles and area campfire regulations.  Campendium and Freecampsites.net list established sites where you can post up in the woods, with no fee and no reservations.  ''If you want to find a place to camp and a way to get away from the crowds, there are millions of acres of B.L.M. and U.S. Forest Service land with legal camping and minimal services,'' said Michael Lanza, creator of the trip-planning website TheBigOutside and a former field editor for Backpacker magazine. ''You won't get a picnic table, but you'll still get a beautiful spot, and it's free.''  Bear in mind that toilets, picnic tables, fire pits, running water, trash services -- amenities usually available at a campground -- aren't on offer in the middle of nowhere.  Drive farther afield.  If none of those earlier options worked, you still have a few more last-ditch options: You can drive farther away or try your luck at a last-minute campsite cancellation. Case in point: While every campsite at Arches National Park in southern Utah may be booked, at Mesa Verde National Park, in southwest Colorado and about two hours from Arches, you can almost always find a spot.  ''Our visitation numbers are a lot lower than a park like Arches. They get a few million visitors per year; we get 600,000,'' said Spencer Burke, a park ranger at Mesa Verde National Park. ''We have a big campground that always has last-minute availability. Working in the visitors' center, people come in at the end of the day, and say, 'Do you have any campsites available?' It's always nice to be able to say: 'Yes. We have room for you.'''  Be willing to explore new, more obscure areas. The campgrounds inside Acadia National Park, in Maine, might be packed, but you can find an empty, remote camp spot within the 21,871 acres of Deboullie Public Land, five hours north. ''Look for parks that are farther from population centers and airports,'' Mr. Lanza said. ''The farther away you are, the farther you are from other people.''  Cancellations happen, too. Often, campground websites don't reflect real-time data on what's actually available and, because cancellation policies differ, some campers don't bother to cancel a reservation they no longer need. Even if the website shows no availability, you can always show up and ask the camp host if any sites are open. Better yet, give a call if a phone number is listed.  ''I always recommend a phone call,'' Mr. Query, from the Estes Park KOA, said. ''Call the campground office to see if your luck might be working in your favor that day.''  If all else fails, and you can't get a site for Friday night, you can always pitch a tent in the backyard or the living room. The s'mores still taste just as good there.  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places list for 2021 .  A spot at Fred Hayes State Park at Starvation, in Utah. It is bookable on the campsite sharing app Tentrr. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHELDON MARTINEAU) (D6-D7)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005t "
176		"    Texas G.O.P. Targets Access For City Voters  By Nick Corasaniti  1,861 words 25 April 2021   1     In Houston, election officials found creative ways to help a struggling and diverse work force vote in a pandemic. Record turnout resulted. Now the G.O.P. is targeting those very measures.  HOUSTON -- Voting in the 2020 election presented Zoe Douglas with a difficult choice: As a therapist meeting with patients over Zoom late into the evening, she just wasn't able to wrap up before polls closed during early voting.  Then Harris County introduced 24-hour voting for a single day. At 11 p.m. on the Thursday before the election, Ms. Douglas joined fast-food workers, nurses, construction workers, night owls and other late-shift workers at NRG Arena, one of eight 24-hour voting sites in the county, where more than 10,000 people cast their ballots in a single night.  ''I can distinctly remember people still in their uniforms -- you could tell they just got off of work, or maybe they're going to work; a very diverse mix,'' said Ms. Douglas, 27, a Houston native.  Twenty-four-hour voting was one of a host of options Harris County introduced to help residents cast ballots, along with drive-through voting and proactively mailing out ballot applications. The new alternatives, tailored to a diverse work force struggling amid a pandemic in Texas' largest county, helped increase turnout by nearly 10 percent compared with 2016; nearly 70 percent of registered voters cast ballots, and a task force found that there was no evidence of any fraud.  Yet Republicans are pushing measures through the State Legislature that would take aim at the very process that produced such a large turnout. Two omnibus bills, including one that the House is likely to take up in the coming week, are seeking to roll back virtually every expansion the county put in place for 2020.  The bills would make Texas one of the hardest states in the country to cast a ballot in. And they are a prime example of a Republican-led effort to roll back voting access in Democrat-rich cities and populous regions like Atlanta and Arizona's Maricopa County, while having far less of an impact on voting in rural areas that tend to lean Republican.  Bills in several states are, in effect, creating a two-pronged approach to urban and rural areas that raises questions about the disparate treatment of cities and the large number of voters of color who live in them. That divide is helping to fuel opposition from corporations that are based in or have work forces in those places.  In Texas, Republicans have taken the rare tack of outlining restrictions that would apply only to counties with population of more than one million, targeting the booming and increasingly diverse metropolitan areas of Houston, Austin, San Antonio and Dallas.  The Republican focus on diverse urban areas, voting activists say, evokes the state's history of racially discriminatory voting laws -- including poll taxes and ''white primary'' laws during the Jim Crow era -- that essentially excluded Black voters from the electoral process.  Most of Harris County's early voters were white, according to a study by the Texas Civil Rights Project, a nonprofit group. But the majority of those who used drive-through or 24-hour voting -- the early voting methods the Republican bills would prohibit -- were people of color, the group found.  ''It's clear they are trying to make it harder for people to vote who face everyday circumstances, especially things like poverty and other situations,'' said Chris Hollins, a Democrat and the former interim clerk of Harris County, who oversaw and implemented many of the policies during the November election. ''With 24-hour voting, there wasn't even claims or a legal challenge during the election.''  The effort to further restrict voting in Texas is taking place against the backdrop of an increasingly tense showdown between legislators and Texas-based corporations, with Republicans in the House proposing financial retribution for companies that have spoken out.  American Airlines and Dell Technologies both voiced strong opposition to the bill, and AT&T issued a statement supporting ''voting laws that make it easier for more Americans to vote,'' though it did not specifically mention Texas.  American Airlines also dispatched Jack McCain, the son of former Senator John McCain, to lobby Republicans in Austin to roll back some of the more stringent restrictions.  Republicans in the State Legislature appear unbowed. In amendments filed to the state budget this week, House Republicans proposed that ''an entity that publicly threatened any adverse reaction'' related to ''election integrity'' would not be eligible for some state funds.  While those amendments did not end up in the final budget, a broader proposal threatening corporations that speak out on ''any legislative or executive action'' was added to the state's ''wishlist,'' a compilation of longshot proposals. Even with unlikely odds of passing, simply placing the proposals on the record is seen by lobbyists and operatives in Austin as a thinly veiled warning to businesses to stay quiet on the voting bills.  The Perryman Group, an economic research and analysis firm based in Waco, said in a recent study that implementing controversial voting measures could lead to conferences or events being pulled from the state, and prompt businesses or workers to shun it. The group estimated that restrictive new laws would lead to a huge decrease in business activity in the state by 2025 and cost tens of thousands of jobs.  Among the restrictions in two omnibus bills in the Texas Legislature are a ban on 24-hour voting, a ban on drive-through voting and harsh criminal penalties for local election officials who provide assistance to voters. There are also new limits on voting machine distribution that could lead to a reduction in numbers of precincts and a ban on encouraging absentee voting.  The bills also include a measure that would make it much more difficult to remove a poll watcher for improper conduct. Partisan poll watchers, who are trained and authorized to observe the election on behalf of a candidate or party, have occasionally crossed the line into voter intimidation or other types of misbehavior; Harris County elections officials said they had received several complaints about Republican poll watchers last year.  Mr. Hollins, the former Harris County clerk, said Republicans recognized that ''Black and brown and poor and young people'' use the flexible voting options more than others. ''They're scared of that,'' he said.  While Republican-controlled legislatures in Georgia and Arizona are passing new voting laws after Democratic victories in November, Texas is pushing new restrictions despite having backed former President Donald J. Trump by more than 600,000 votes. The effort reflects the dual realities confronting Republicans in the State Legislature: a base eager for changes to voting following Mr. Trump's 2020 loss and a booming population that is growing more diverse.  Senator Bryan Hughes, a Republican from northeastern Texas who sponsored the State Senate bill, defended it as part of a long effort to strengthen ''election security'' in Texas.  ''I realize there's a big national debate now, and maybe we're getting sucked into that, but this is not something new to Texas,'' Mr. Hughes said in an interview. He said that lawmakers were seeking to roll back mail voting access because that process was more prone to fraud. He offered no proof, and numerous studies have shown that voter fraud in the United States is exceptionally rare.  Mr. Hughes said that the proposed ban on drive-through voting stemmed from the difficulty of getting access for partisan poll watchers at the locations and that 24-hour voting was problematic because it was difficult to find poll watchers for overnight shifts.  But many voters in Harris County, whose population of 4.7 million ranks third in the country and is bigger than 25 states', see a different motive.  Kristie Osi-Shackelford, a costume designer from Houston who was working temporary jobs during the pandemic to help support her family, used 24-hour voting because it offered her the flexibility she needed as she juggled work and raising her three children. She said that it had taken her less than 10 minutes.  ''I'm sure there are people who may not have gotten to vote in the last couple of elections, but they had the opportunity at night, and it's kind of sad that the powers that be feel like that has to be taken away in order to, quote unquote, protect election integrity,'' Ms. Osi-Shackelford said. ''And I struggled to find words, because it's so irritating, and I'm tired. I'm tired of hearing the same stuff and seeing the same stuff so blatantly over and over again for years.''  Brittany Hyman, 35, was eight months pregnant as Election Day was drawing near and was also raising a 4-year-old. Fearful of Covid-19 but also of the sheer logistics of navigating a line at the polls, Ms. Hyman voted at one of the drive-through locations.  ''Being able to drive-through vote was a savior for me,'' Ms. Hyman said. She added that because she had been pregnant, she probably wouldn't have risked waiting in a long line to vote.  Harris County's drive-through voting, which more than 127,000 voters took advantage of in the general election, drew immediate attention from state Republicans, who sued Mr. Hollins and the county in an attempt to ban the practice and discard any votes cast in the drive-through process. The Texas Supreme Court ruled against the Republicans in late October.  Other provisions in the G.O.P. bill, while not aimed as directly at Harris County, will most likely still have the biggest impact in the state's biggest county. One proposal, which calls for a uniform number of voting machines to be deployed in each precinct, could hamper the ability to deploy extra machines in densely populated areas.  This month, in a further escalation of public pressure on legislators, Mayor Sylvester Turner of Houston, a Democrat, gathered more than a dozen speakers, including business executives, civil rights activists and former athletes, for a 90-minute news conference denouncing the bill.  ''What is happening here in Texas is a warning shot to the rest of the country,'' said Lina Hidalgo, the Harris County judge and a Democrat who has pushed for continued expansion of voting access in the county. ''First Georgia, then Texas, then it's more and more states, and soon enough we will have taken the largest step back since Jim Crow. And it's on all of us to stop that.''  The drive-through voting site at NRG Stadium in Houston last October. More than 10,000 ballots were cast for the presidential election in a single night at that location. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GO NAKAMURA FOR THE new_york_times); BRITTANY HYMAN, 35, was eight months pregnant during the election and raising a 4-year-old.; ZOE DOUGLAS, 27, a Houston native. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK FELIX FOR THE new_york_times) (A20)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005s "
177		"    Escaping 'This Fear': L.G.B.T.Q. People Flee A More Hateful Poland  By Monika Pronczuk  1,488 words 25 April 2021   10     An escalation in verbal attacks by the Polish government, with the support of the Roman Catholic Church, as well as the threat of physical violence on the streets of many cities, has triggered an exodus of gay people.  For months, government ministers spewed vicious rhetoric about gay people. Trucks blasted anti-gay hate messages from loudspeakers on the streets of Poland's cities.  Finally fed up with an increasingly hostile environment for gay people in Poland under the governing Law and Justice party, Marta Malachowska, a 31-year-old who works in social media, decided to move to Berlin with her girlfriend in December.  ''Last year the situation became too much for me,'' Ms. Malachowska said, adding that she had suffered a nervous breakdown during the country's presidential election last summer when anti-L.G.B.T.Q. rhetoric engaged in by the governing party became especially shrill in an effort to appeal to socially conservative voters. The final straw came when a close friend was assaulted because of her sexual orientation, she said.  Arriving in Berlin, she knew she had made the right choice.  ''The first thing I saw was a giant rainbow flag hanging across the street from our flat,'' she said. ''I take my girlfriend's hand when we walk in the street, without thinking.'' She added: ''Back in Poland, there was always this fear inside me. Here, literally no one cares.''  People have for decades left Poland looking for opportunities elsewhere in Europe -- an exodus that grew after the country joined the European Union in 2004. But now their numbers are being added to by gay people fleeing an increasingly hostile environment in Poland.  According to a 2020 survey by ILGA-Europe, an international gay rights organization, Poland now ranks as the most homophobic country in the European Union. Activists say that violence against gay people in Poland surged last year, and included cases of physical violence, insults and the destruction of property.  It is hard to know how many gay people there are in Poland, or how many are leaving. There is no polling on their views or preferences. And since they are unable to form civil unions, gay couples are practically invisible in official terms. The law does not recognize sexual orientation or gender as motivations for hate crimes, either.  ''This is not an accident,'' said Jacek Dehnel, a writer who originally moved to Berlin for a literary scholarship with his husband, and decided to stay for good after watching what he called last summer's ''vicious'' presidential campaign. ''If there are no statistics, there is no problem.''  But anecdotally, especially within the country's well-educated gay urban communities, there are many stories of young L.G.B.T.Q. professionals emigrating.  Piotr Grabarczyk, a 31-year-old journalist, left Poland for Barcelona with his boyfriend last July, attracted by Spain's more liberal way of life.  Originally from a small town in northern Poland, he described his childhood as one of ''complete loneliness and alienation -- the internet was my only escape.''  ''When I found out gay marriage in Spain had been legal since 2005, it knocked me off my feet,'' he said. ''I was 16 in 2005. My life would have been so different if I lived in such a country.''  As he was preparing to leave Poland, a cardboard box filled with rainbow T-shirts, leaflets and educational books that he left outside his home in an upscale gated community in Warsaw was defaced with the message ''BURN LGBT!''  ''I realized it must have been one of my neighbors,'' he said. ''We probably saw each other in the staircase, said hello.''  He said he received many messages from people across Poland, ''who would like to leave for the same reasons as us, but cannot because of money, family, or their career choices.''  Homosexuality has long been taboo in Poland, where the Roman Catholic Church, which plays a prominent role in the country's social and political life, has worked hand in hand with the government to promote a conservative way of life.  The church, which is particularly powerful in rural areas, has adopted an actively hostile attitude toward gay people. Mr. Dehnel, the writer who moved to Berlin last year, said it was ''the driving force of hate'' toward the gay community.  Responding to a request for comment, the Catholic Church pointed to an official document outlining its position, stating that homosexual ''inclinations'' did not constitute ''moral guilt,'' but homosexual acts did. It declined to comment on hate speech employed by priests, and the accusation that they were contributing to the general deterioration of the safety of gay people in Poland.  Marek Jedraszewski, Poland's archbishop, has described L.G.B.T.Q. people as an ''ideology,'' calling it a ''rainbow pest.''  The Law and Justice party, which has been in power since 2015, has whipped up its base by waging hate campaigns, first centering around migrants, and later the L.G.B.T.Q. community. Neither the government nor the president responded to requests for comment.  In April 2019 Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the chairman of the Law and Justice party and Poland's de facto leader, called homosexuality a ''threat to Polish identity, to our nation, to its existence, and thus to the Polish state.''  Mr. Kaczynski's message was amplified by the state-owned news media and other government figures, including local politicians.  ''We should defend families from this type of corruption, depravation, absolutely immoral behavior,'' Przemyslaw Czarnek, a Law and Justice deputy, who has been promoted to the position of education minister, said in an interview with the public broadcaster last year. ''These people are not equal to normal people.''  Trucks funded by ultraconservative organizations have roamed the country, blaring slogans from speakers accusing gay people of pedophilia. There have been increasing cases of violence during pride marches, and against individuals.  In one incident in a village in southern Poland, a young gay man was harassed by neighbors hurling homophobic abuse at him, and one tried to poison his dog. In March 2021, another gay man was verbally attacked and then stabbed for holding hands with his partner in Warsaw.  As a gay person in Poland, Mr. Grabarczyk, the journalist who moved to Barcelona, said that psychological violence was ''an everyday experience'' for him.  ''You are constantly reminded that you will never get the same rights as everyone else, that you are not an equal citizen,'' he said.  Emboldened by the narrative coming from the country's top officials, nearly 100 local governments declared themselves ''free from L.G.B.T. ideology,'' making gay Poles feel unwelcome in their own towns.  The legal status of L.G.B.T.Q. people in Poland has not changed under the rule of the Law and Justice party. They never had the right to enter civil partnerships or get married. But what changed was the viciousness of the rhetoric at the highest echelons of government and in the state-controlled news media, activists say.  And policy could yet change. In a bid to get re-elected last year, President Andrzej Duda signed a draft law that would amend the Constitution to ban adoptions by gay people.  Before Ms. Malachowska, the social media specialist, moved to Berlin, she was concerned about the practical implications of the legal limbo she and her girlfriend would be in if they stayed in Poland. There, they would not be considered next of kin in a medical emergency, or be able to inherit from each other.  In Poland, she also began to get emotionally attached to the idea of marrying her partner.  ''We already checked how to do it in Berlin, and I started visualizing how it would look like -- the first time in my life I dared to even imagine that,'' she said.  While she is happy to be in Berlin, she is sad that her grandmother still doesn't know about her sexual orientation. ''I told her I am moving to Berlin with my flatmate,'' she said. ''It feels awful to lie to my closest family.''  Marta Malachowska, left, and her girlfriend, Dorota Rafacz, in Berlin. The couple left Poland in December, fed up with a growing homophobia fueled by the government and the state-run media. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LENA MUCHA FOR THE new_york_times); The town of Krasnik, in Poland's Lubelskie region, which declared itself free of ''L.G.B.T. ideology'' in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KASIA STREK FOR THE new_york_times); An L.G.B.T.Q. rally in Warsaw in 2019 after a gay pride march was attacked by hooligans. Right, anti-gay protesters during a gay pride parade in Lublin. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANNA LIMINOWICZ FOR THE new_york_times; WOJTEK RADWANSKI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005p "
178		"   ON POLITICS WITH LISA LERER  Democrats frame their arguBiden's Promises on Racial Justice  By Lisa Lerer  1,414 words 25 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF National 21     A president evolves on civil rights along with the country.  Hi. Welcome to On Politics , your wrap-up of the week in national politics. I'm Lisa Lerer, your host .  As a college student, Joseph R. Biden Jr. was more consumed with Corvettes than with civil rights. A little more than a decade later, he made common cause with Southern Republicans in the Senate to slow school desegregation. One of his most significant legislative achievements was a 1994 crime bill that helped lay the groundwork for the mass incarceration that has devastated America's Black communities. And as vice president, he often ceded discussion of the complex dynamics of race to Barack Obama, the country's first Black president.  Yet through it all, Mr. Biden cast himself as staunch ally of racial justice, captivated and inspired at a young age by the battle for civil rights.  ''I wasn't at the bridge at Selma,'' he said in an interview in 2008, ''but the struggle for civil rights was the animating political element of my life.''  Well, that was then. Thirteen years later, race is an issue that Mr. Biden can no longer finesse quite as easily.  The killing of George Floyd last year reignited a civil rights movement, plunging the country into a deep reckoning over race. As president, Mr. Biden now leads a party that has made racial justice a defining element of its coalition, offering the country sweeping pledges to combat deep-seated prejudice and reform the criminal justice system.  Unlike any other period in recent history, Democrats have infused their agenda with a focus on racial inequality, upending decades of conventional party wisdom that such appeals could prove politically risky.  ''The dream of justice for all will be deferred no longer,'' Mr. Biden said during his inauguration address. ''We can deliver racial justice.''  So Mr. Biden is promising big things. Very big things, like correcting more than 400 years of systemic racism in America. Now that Democrats control Washington, how far they can move the government to make good on that vow offers one of the first tests of their campaign pledges.  Activists say that Mr. Biden's embrace of racial justice reflects how the country has changed. The president has always positioned himself at the center of his party, shifting his positions as Democrats marched to the left on issues including abortion, gun rights, criminal justice and race.  ''Biden is actually being Biden by being inside of all of the ways in which the current landscape is sending him messages,'' said Rashad Robinson, the president of Color of Change, a racial justice organization that was skeptical of Mr. Biden during the Democratic primary race but now praised some successes while believing much more needs to be done. ''That is good, but I don't want to be classifying this as some sort of out-front radical leadership. That would really not represent everything that could be possible if we leaned in more.''  Yet the Democratic decision to embrace racial issues is not without political peril, given how deeply these matters have come to be defined by partisan divides. While the country's views on race have shifted, it's an open question as to how much white liberals and independents would support efforts to truly unwind some of the broader systems -- like segregated schools and neighborhoods -- that reinforce racial inequality.  A new paper by political scientists at Yale found that support for progressive policies -- like raising the minimum wage, forgiving student loan debt and the Green New Deal -- actually declines when Democrats frame their arguments in racial terms, despite the shift in public opinion on the topic.  ''Democrats' use of racial frames in describing their progressive policies may inadvertently make it harder for them to adopt public policies that will advance racial justice,'' the Yale researchers write.  Mr. Biden is far from the only Democrat speaking more explicitly about race. After George Floyd, many Democratic voters and politicians found themselves getting a crash course in racial inequality. Some of the efforts to show solidarity were ham-handed, at best: When Democrats released legislation to overhaul policing last June, they did so draped in cringe-worthy kente cloth stoles. Even this past week, Speaker Nancy Pelosi offered a tone-deaf response to the guilty verdict against Derek Chauvin by thanking Mr. Floyd for ''sacrificing'' his life, seeming to imply that the victim of police violence had a choice in the matter.  But during the campaign, Mr. Biden ''did the work,'' as liberal activists would say, despite his occasional gaffes when talking about race and Black Americans. He apologized for portions of the 1994 crime bill. His campaign released a comprehensive plan to address racial disparities on issues ranging from health to policing, with a particular focus on advancing economic equality, increasing access to affordable housing and education and reforming the criminal justice system.  Since taking office, Mr. Biden has vowed to make racial equity central to every element of his agenda -- from his response to the coronavirus pandemic to where infrastructure is built to how climate policies are crafted.  This week, the Justice Department announced a sweeping investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department, a sign that the Biden administration will apply stricter federal oversight to local police forces. And in a speech on Tuesday night, Mr. Biden formally called on lawmakers to resurrect the Democratic bill known as the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, which seeks to address racial discrimination and the use of excessive force. The president pledged to sign it into law ''as quickly as possible.''  A fair number of voters believe those actions aren't enough: Forty-two percent of Americans say Mr. Biden is doing ''too little'' to reform police practices in the country, while 32 percent say he has done the right amount and 15 percent say he has done ''too much,'' according to a new Washington Post-ABC News poll. Nearly half of Black Americans and Democrats say Biden has done too little on the issue, a significant break from their strong support of his agenda on other issues.  Republicans see an opportunity to campaign on some of those fears. In 2020, the party found some success by characterizing moderate Democrats in swing districts as anti-law-enforcement and supportive of violent protests, saying they supported calls from the left to ''defund the police.'' Since then, Republicans have leaned into that messaging, with G.O.P.-controlled state legislatures passing bills to reduce voting access, empower the police and target protesters.  The response to Mr. Floyd's killing provided more evidence that Republicans see political opportunities in this moment of reckoning. While many Republicans stayed silent on the Chauvin verdict, some of those who responded showed an unwillingness to let reality get in the way of what they see as a good political talking point. Even as worries of unrest dissipated into a pained sort of celebration, some in the G.O.P. kept their focus firmly on the violence that didn't happen on Tuesday evening.  On Fox News, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida implied that the guilty verdict could have happened because ''the jury is scared of what a mob may do.''  The idea that rioting ''is going to influence how the rule of law is applied -- would be a total disaster if that idea takes hold,'' he said.  Drop us a line!  We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We'll try to answer it. Have a comment? We're all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com or message me on Twitter at @llerer .  By the numbers: 20,000  ... That's the number of adult Tyrannosaurus rexes that once roamed North America. (Maybe.)  ... Seriously  Peak Florida man (or woman). The news outlet Insider got to the bottom of it.  Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.  On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.  Is there anything you think we're missing? Anything you want to see more of? We'd love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com .  President Biden speaking about his agenda on racial issues at the White House in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005o "
179		"   Money and U The Mushroom Boom  By Alana Paterson and Julie Creswell  1,493 words 25 April 2021   6     Inside a state-of-the-art lab, tucked in an industrial neighborhood on Vancouver Island in British Columbia, employees wearing protective suits move around two clear boxes, careful not to disrupt the tubes and sensors that keep temperature and humidity constant. Inside the boxes are mushrooms.  But not just any mushrooms. They are psychedelic -- ''magic'' -- mushrooms that the start-up Numinus Wellness believes one day may be used to treat mental health conditions as varied as depression, substance abuse and anxiety.  Welcome to the 'Shroom Boom. While Numinus is using mushrooms to make mind-altering therapies, other mushroom growers are promising other benefits, like strengthening immune systems or reducing inflammation. Mushrooms are showing up in all sorts of wellness products, pushing them into the mainstream and making mushrooms a major force in the flourishing, multibillion-dollar wellness market.  It's hard these days to throw a rock and not hit a mushroom.  A top-selling coffee on Amazon by Four Sigmatic is made with the chaga mushroom, promising immune support and stress relief. Mushroom supplements that claim to support immune systems, reduce inflammation and improve moods can be found in health and wellness stores, but also major retailers like Nordstrom and Urban Outfitters. Om Hot Chocolate says it will help you focus and de-stress. For $96, the Beauty brand Mara sells a vitamin C serum that contains reishi mushrooms that it claims will reduce inflammation.  ''As a food, mushrooms have a lot of things going for them in terms of their nutritional value,'' said Joshua Lambert, a co-director of the Center for Plant and Mushroom Foods for Health at the Penn State College for Agricultural Sciences. ''But one of the things we're looking into are the other compounds that mushrooms and other plants have that may have significant health benefits.''  The latest frontier for mushrooms could be the most interesting -- and the most complicated. Last November, Oregon became the first state to legalize psilocybin, the main active ingredient in ''magic'' mushrooms, for the treatment of certain mental health conditions in supervised settings. In March, the New York City mayoral candidate Andrew Yang said New York State should legalize psychedelic mushrooms, a stance he raised in 2019 when he was a Democratic presidential candidate.  Regulators in the United States and Canada are taking baby steps toward allowing limited use of psychedelic mushrooms, which produce visual and auditory hallucinations over a few hours after ingestion, for the treatment of certain mental health conditions. Popular as part of the counterculture in the 1960s, magic mushrooms were deemed illegal in the United States in the 1970s.  Investors are taking note. Atai Life Sciences, a German firm developing psychedelic and nonpsychedelic compounds for various mental health conditions, is backed by the billionaire venture capitalist Peter Thiel and others. It filed plans this past week to raise $100 million in a public offering. Another psychedelic company, MindMed, has financial backing from Kevin O'Leary of ''Shark Tank.''  In the past year, more than 20 companies focused on psychedelics have gone public, and a dozen more existing public companies have moved into the space, according to analysts at the Vancouver-based investment bank Canaccord Genuity.  ''There are currently 100 to 150 clinical trials underway using psychedelic compounds to treat mental and behavioral health conditions,'' analysts at Canaccord Genuity wrote in a report in March, adding ''the industry has come a long way in the last year, but, there's still a long way to go.''  Some investors are betting that the psychedelic companies could follow in the footsteps of marijuana, which has been legalized for recreational use in more than a dozen states, including New York in March. But some analysts and many of the companies themselves caution that the path for psychedelics will most likely be very different.  ''Psychedelics are about health care, medically approved therapies. It's not going to go the recreational route that cannabis did,'' said Payton Nyquvest, who co-founded Numinus in 2018 and is its chief executive. And while Numinus was the first public company in Canada to harvest the first legal batch of mushrooms from the Psilocybe genus last year, its stock has been stuck trading under one dollar.  Mr. Nyquvest attributed the stock price to the fact that ''the sector has only recently come to prominence, and investors are still trying to define how to value companies in the space.''  The current mushroom boom is a surprise to many industry long-timers.  While Europeans and Asians loved the wild mushrooms that Joseph Salvo of Ponderosa Mushrooms harvested all across Canada, he couldn't drive up any interest among U.S. or Canadian consumers.  Though long loved in Italian pasta dishes, a staple in Japanese soups, and a robust substitution for meat, mushrooms have been a tough sell to U.S. and Canadian consumers. That began to shift about eight years ago when more chefs started using wild mushrooms in cooking shows and such, said Mr. Salvo. Then, Costco began carrying his fresh, in-season chanterelle mushrooms in its stores.  Today, Mr. Salvo grows shiitake, king oyster and other mushrooms in Ponderosa Mushroom's 28 temperature- and climate-controlled rooms. He also grows shiitake mushrooms outdoors in the logs of alder trees. The mushrooms are shipped to retailers all over the world.  While much of Ponderosa's mushrooms end up on dinner plates, Mr. Salvo said his mushrooms were also making their way into new, interesting areas, like tea and even beer.  Five hours east of Vancouver in Vernon, B.C., the start-up Doseology Sciences is also focusing on the wellness area. Inside a series of climate-controlled shipping containers that smell of damp, cool soil, Doseology is growing lion's mane, shiitake and cordyceps mushrooms. A larger facility will be used to grow psychedelic mushrooms when it gets its license to do so, which could happen later this year.  Various mushroom tinctures, serums and powders are finding their way into wellness regimens partly because after decades of relying on pharmaceuticals to control various diseases and conditions, consumers are now increasingly focusing on diet and more natural ways to improve their health, said Dr. Lambert, of Penn State.  Frustration with traditional drugs that did little to address his longtime chronic pain and mental health conditions is what drove Mr. Nyquvest of Numinus to become interested in psychedelic compounds as a treatment.  He points to numerous studies around the benefits of psychedelic mushrooms, including a 2016 study by researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine that found use of psilocybin relieved anxiety and depression in people with a life-threatening cancer diagnosis. A second, small study involving 24 participants conducted by Johns Hopkins researchers that was published in JAMA Psychiatry found that those who received psilocybin-assisted therapy showed improvement as well.  ''The magnitude of the effect we saw was about four times larger than what clinical trials have shown for traditional antidepressants on the market,'' Alan Davis, adjunct assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, said in an announcement about the study's results.  The Food and Drug Administration has put at least two psychedelic mushroom compounds on the fast track for approval to treat depression.  Last year, Canada began allowing a limited number of people with terminal illness to use psychedelic mushrooms. Currently, Numinus is working toward a psilocybin-assisted therapy trial for patients with substance abuse disorders.  And while regulators in the United States are taking a new look at psychedelic mushrooms, psilocybin is still a Schedule 1 drug and would need to be reclassified by regulators.  Despite those hurdles, though, Mr. Nyquvest sees the potential for a broader use of psychedelic mushrooms around wellness, beyond what he called ''treating really heavy indicators'' of substance abuse and depression.  ''The same way you go to the dentist to take care of the teeth, we need to think about taking care of the brain and mental well being.''  Center, clockwise from upper near right: A Numinus lab; Numinus is investigating a variety of methods, including liquid nitrogen, to develop standardized mushroom extracts for clinical trials; Amanda Brunton, a research assistant and analyst at Numinus, harvesting a psilocybin mushroom; a lion's mane mushroom at Doseology. Bottom row from left to right: shiitake mushrooms are being investigated for health benefits; the Friendship Mushroom farm grows oyster mushrooms; Pablo Morales, lead mycologist, with lions mane and shiitake mushrooms in the Doseology cultivation room; oyster mushrooms growing at Ponderosa Mushrooms; the beginning of the oyster mushrooms.; Far left, a lab at Numinus harvesting mushrooms from the genus Psilocybe. They contain psilocybin, which has potential for a variety of therapies. Left, S&J Specality Mushrooms in British Columbia grows only shiitake. Below, A harvested oyster mushroom at Ponderosa, which has 28 temperature- and climate-controlled rooms. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALANA PATERSON) (BU6-BU7)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005n "
180		"    Hollywood Bias Comes at a Hefty Price  By Franklin Leonard  1,492 words 25 April 2021   2     Days after a Minneapolis police officer, Derek Chauvin, suffocated George Floyd and the video went viral, I watched my social media feed fill with blackout tiles and corporate publicity statements. They poured in from every industry, proclaiming solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement. Hollywood -- where I have worked for almost two decades -- was no exception.  Far from offering relief, each new assertion by a talent agency, film studio, television network or streaming service that ''silence is complicity'' and that ''we must do better'' felt like a pinch of salt in a gaping wound. I found myself unable to ignore the gap between these meticulously workshopped platitudes and the daily words and actions I've witnessed in Hollywood, which reflect values I knew cost not only dollars but lives: How many movies like ''Black Panther'' have we not made? And more broadly, how many lives have we lost in part because of the dehumanization of Black people that Hollywood has perpetuated for more than a century?  Two weeks later, McKinsey and Company -- where I worked as a business analyst from 2001 to 2003 before decamping to California to become an assistant at Creative Artists Agency -- entered the fray, with a pro bono commitment to ''work globally to advance racial equity and economic empowerment among Black communities.'' As a representative of the Blacklight Collective, an informal group of Black Hollywood executives, I suggested that the consulting giant conduct a study on the state of Black people in Hollywood.  Its report was released last month. Despite its anodyne title -- ''Black Representation in Film and TV'' -- it contained shocking revelations. Or at least shocking to anyone who hasn't been paying attention.  The study concluded that America's film industry is the country's least diverse business sector and that its systemic anti-Black biases cost it at least $10 billion in annual revenue. Black content is undervalued, underdistributed and underfunded, the analysis found. It also found that Black talent has been systematically shut out of creator, producer, director and writer positions. That is despite the fact that films with two or more Black people working in those roles made 10 percent more at the box office per dollar invested than films with no or only one Black person in those capacities.  For anyone who may absorb that data and conclude that the lack of diversity in film and television, while unfortunate, isn't an important societal concern, a history lesson is crucial: Even during the Civil War, the abolitionist and orator Frederick Douglass argued often for the vital importance of imagery and the narratives they create in fostering a pluralistic society.  Through sheer force of will, Douglass -- born a slave in Talbot County, Md., in 1818 -- made himself the most photographed American of the 19th century, partly driven by a belief that his now-iconic image, when paired with rhetoric, could debunk prevalent representations of Black people in his time as caricatures and nonhuman specimens. It was a campaign he shouldn't have had to wage in the first place, but was also one that, as the Douglass biographer and Yale historian David Blight has explained, won over many ambivalent whites.  In 1916, a mere two decades after Douglass's death, Hollywood produced its first blockbuster, ''The Birth of a Nation,'' which created the Ku Klux Klan's hooded, cross-burning iconography. The propagandistic film, given a special screening at Woodrow Wilson's White House, supercharged the organization's bloody resurgence and solidified the view of Black men as criminal predators in white America's imagination.  More than a century later, the need to confront racial stereotypes onscreen endures. According to McKinsey, ''both on- and offscreen, Black talent is pigeonholed and funneled to race-related content, which often plays into stereotypes.'' A 2016 Vox analysis found that 62 percent of onscreen gang members were Black.  Is it surprising, then, that the casual murders of Black people -- both those captured on smartphones and the many more that preceded the smartphone era -- are predicated on the perception of us as violent, criminal threats? (Similarly: Should we be shocked at the chillingly broad chorus of Americans chanting ''Build the Wall'' when so many Latino immigrant characters are shown engaged in criminal activity? And who can be genuinely surprised by the massacre in Atlanta, given the stories Hollywood has helped tell about women generally, and Asian women specifically?'')  It would be easy to mistake the Blacklight Collective's solicitation of McKinsey's work as grievance peddling. It's not. It's about business. Black people in Hollywood simply want to write, direct, produce, perform, photograph, negotiate, design and do hair and makeup for film and television, then profit from their labor in a manner that isn't limited by the fact that they happen to be Black.  We all would love to be rid of the need to push for greater racial equity. We are also not naïve about the cold, hard truths. We do not expect that change in Hollywood will come out of the good in any leading executive's heart. But we know that reversing the industry's systemic racism is an extraordinary business opportunity -- one that would benefit not just Black Hollywood, but all of Hollywood.  Without paying McKinsey a penny, the film industry can reclaim at least $10 billion in annual revenue, simply by addressing irrational, anti-Black market inefficiencies. The consultants also argue that there's an even greater windfall to be had by addressing all the other market inefficiencies that stem from locking out other people according to race, gender, sexuality or disability.  Here's a partial list of recommendations: Setting intersectional diversity targets onscreen, and especially offscreen, by expanding recruiting beyond traditional top-tier universities and film schools, increasing transparency around hiring and compensation and tying executive compensation to success in these endeavors.  There is also a proven and increasing demand for diverse content. Setting financial incentives throughout the talent pipeline to meet this demand would be good for everyone who wants to participate in the windfall generated by the next ''Black Panther,'' ''Insecure'' or ''Creed,'' or who wants to work with the ''next'' Ava DuVernay or Oprah Winfrey.  But according to the McKinsey report, another operational reform may be most crucial: Because of the industry's uniquely interdependent value chain, the analysts recommend the creation of ''a dedicated independent advocacy organization to advance racial equity in the field.'' They continue, ''A well-funded, third party organization of this nature could strengthen individual efforts by developing and scaling best practices, collecting and disseminating intersectional data, and reporting on progress across the industry.''  There is ample precedent within Hollywood for this sort of collective action when money is on the line: Look no further than the coordinated, well-resourced efforts the industry took to curb the annual $29.2 billion problem of piracy and intellectual property theft.  We're now almost a year removed from #BlackoutTuesday. The black Instagram tiles and corporate solidarity statements so common during last summer's racial reckoning have receded from most social media time lines and company websites, as things like that always do. The calls and emails people like me got from industry leaders hoping to learn more about being an ally in ''a sustainable way'' were revealed to be onetime, palliative attempts. Perhaps, the lip service we've all seen is to be expected.  For all its high-minded, artistic self-regard, all of its social and political influence, the film and television industry is, primarily, a business. As such, the industry does little without the promise of creating or maximizing profit. That means getting Hollywood to make more major commitments to improving society at large will continue to be an uphill battle.  But throughout my two decades in the industry, the claim has always been that substantively addressing diversity, equity and inclusion would cost too much and earn too little. Now, we have data that echo what many have been saying for generations. Inclusion isn't expensive. Exclusion is.  How much longer will corporate boards and shareholders tolerate the suboptimal, almost laughable, financial outcomes driven by a whitewashed status quo?  Franklin Leonard, a film producer, is the founder of the Black List, an annual survey list of well-liked, unproduced screenplays. He was the recipient of the Writers Guild of America, East's 2019 Evelyn F. Burkey Award, which recognizes a person or organization whose contributions have brought honor and dignity to writers.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Linda Huang FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005m "
181		"    Anguish of The World's Doctor  By Nicholas Kristof  978 words 25 April 2021   7     Dr. Tedros of the W.H.O. publicly focuses on managing the pandemic. Privately, he weeps as his Tigrayan people are raped, starved and slaughtered.  He is the world's doctor, and for months he has tirelessly led the global response to the coronavirus pandemic while privately nursing a piercing anguish.  Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the World Health Organization, has largely kept his pain secret, maintaining a stoic public front. But when I probed, he wept.  Dr. Tedros is from Tigray, a part of Ethiopia that since November has endured crimes against humanity by Ethiopian and Eritrean soldiers. U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken has properly described atrocities in western Tigray as ethnic cleansing, but the world has largely been indifferent.  Tigrayan children are starving to death, men have been clubbed to death, and women and girls have been subjected to mass rape. Ethiopian opposition parties claim that more than 50,000 people have been killed -- that is not verifiable, and the toll is unknown -- and the scale of torture, starvation, murder and destruction in the past few months may have been the worst in the world.  ''Hunger is weaponized, rape is weaponized, there is indiscriminate killing,'' Dr. Tedros said. ''The whole region is hungry.''  ''It's so painful,'' he added. ''I don't have words.''  His cousin, a 68-year-old woman, was killed while trying to shelter in a church, he said. Another relative, a 16-year-old high school student, was shot in the street. Internet and telephone links have been cut off, so Dr. Tedros can't reach family members in Tigray to get more information about who has been tortured or murdered.  My Times colleague Declan Walsh has reported on atrocities such as a 26-year-old man being beaten to death with beer bottles and girls as young as 8 being sexually assaulted. The United Nations humanitarian chief, Mark Lowcock, described a woman whose husband was killed, who lost her unborn baby and who then was gang-raped in front of her children.  Even though Dr. Tedros is one of the world's most recognized public servants, he may have become a refugee. He is now based at W.H.O. headquarters in Geneva, but he would probably not be safe if he tried to return to Tigray. Ethiopia's military chief has denounced him as a criminal.  I've known and admired Dr. Tedros for 15 years, but we have periodically tangled over his deference to dictators. I asked Dr. Tedros about that, but he didn't want to discuss politics of any kind -- including whether countries should pressure Ethiopia to stop the slaughter of Tigrayans. He seems deeply conflicted, torn between what he sees as a professional duty to his organization to be impartial, and the horror of an ethnic cleansing of his own people.  Presiding over these crimes against humanity in Tigray is Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia, who came to power in 2018 and was initially hailed as a great reformer; he even won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2019. Abiy is a pro-Western figure over whom the United States has considerable influence -- if we will only use it.  The Tigray crisis is rooted in ethnic tensions and a power struggle. For almost three decades, people from Tigray dominated Ethiopia's central government; Dr. Tedros became Ethiopia's highly regarded health minister in that period, then foreign minister. This Tigrayan-led government ruled effectively, greatly raising living standards, but it was also repressive, torturing critics, imprisoning journalists and stirring deep resentments among other Ethiopians.  After taking power, Prime Minister Abiy reined in Tigrayans and dispatched troops in November to crush what he said was a mutiny in the region. That triggered a civil war with Tigray fighters, and Eritrea's army entered to back up Ethiopia's forces. There is also a risk of a wider war involving Sudan.  All sides in the conflict have committed atrocities, but by far the most serious and credible allegations are against the Ethiopian and Eritrean armies and their allies.  As W.H.O. chief, Dr. Tedros has tried to get vaccines distributed more equitably around the world, while dealing with President Donald Trump's appalling decision to pull the United States out of the W.H.O. (overturned by President Biden on his first day in office). In public, Dr. Tedros is focused on Covid-19 and has mostly kept quiet about atrocities in Tigray.  ''The public sees Tedros devoting every day to managing the pandemic, but privately he is also managing his pain about Tigray,'' said Dr. Annie Sparrow, an assistant professor at Mt. Sinai School of Medicine who was an adviser to Dr. Tedros.  Dr. Tedros was reluctant to give this interview, but when he did his torment was unmistakable. ''We have Covid and are doing our best. On top of that, to have this pain,'' he began, and then the stoic broke down. For more than a minute, he couldn't speak and sobbed.  I respect a man who loses it when contemplating war crimes. I wish more would. And I hope President Biden and other world leaders will hear that agony, on behalf of so many in Tigray who are being starved, raped and murdered, and will use their influence to end this catastrophe.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  People who fled from the Tigray region of Ethiopia waiting in Sudan for supplies from the U.N. refugee agency. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tyler Hicks/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005l "
182		"    Key to Chauvin Verdict Was Humanizing Floyd  By Tim Arango, John Eligon and Shaila Dewan  1,890 words 25 April 2021   1     George Floyd was presented as a full person, not just a body beneath a police officer's knee. Derek Chauvin, who was convicted in his murder, remained an aloof figure.  MINNEAPOLIS -- ''His name,'' the prosecutor said, ''was George Perry Floyd Jr.''  These seven words were the first the jury heard from Steve Schleicher, a prosecutor, in his closing argument in the trial of Derek Chauvin. With them Mr. Schleicher, standing in a bland Minneapolis courtroom, answered a call from the spirited streets 18 floors below, where protesters, for nearly a year, had been shouting a simple demand: Say His Name.  Over the course of the three-week trial that ended last week with a murder conviction for Mr. Chauvin, a white former police officer whose victim was Black, race was rarely an explicit topic of discussion. And yet the presence of the Black Lives Matter movement, which demands that all Black people be seen for their full humanity, was felt throughout the proceedings.  Sometimes it was overt -- potential jurors were asked how they felt about Black Lives Matter on a questionnaire. More often, it was implicit. The idea that Mr. Floyd was a full person and not just a body beneath a knee showed up in tearful witness testimony and in the closing argument, in which Mr. Schleicher uttered the word ''human'' more than a dozen times. The judge prevented the defense from introducing most evidence of Mr. Floyd's past run-ins with the law, while a Minnesota law allowed prosecutors to elicit testimony from his family, presenting him in a way that has been rare in police shooting cases.  For generations, the American criminal justice system has operated by an old playbook in cases of police violence. The backgrounds of victims are placed under a microscope. Prosecutors deciding whether to bring charges against officers parse every misstep from victims' past, as do defense lawyers in the rare instances that officers are charged.  There was the Laquan McDonald case in Chicago, where the defense tried to get the victim's own mother to testify that he had a violent past. In Kenosha, Wis., a prosecutor focused in part on Jacob Blake's past domestic abuse cases in explaining why no charges were filed against the officer who shot him.  The Chauvin trial flipped the script. Mr. Floyd, who had moved to Minneapolis for a fresh start, became a three-dimensional character. Mr. Chauvin, who declined to take the stand, remained an aloof figure, shown on video kneeling on Mr. Floyd's neck for nine and a half minutes with such sang-froid that his sunglasses never lost their perch atop his head. He likely faces between 12.5 and 30 years in prison when he is sentenced in June.  ''I don't think he comes across as like a likable kind of guy,'' Lisa Christensen, an alternate juror in the trial, said about Mr. Chauvin. ''I didn't get any vibes from him like he was sorry. It was just cold, like a cold feeling.''  She left the courtroom feeling a profound sense of empathy for Mr. Floyd, saying that the prosecution put ''a face on a human being to the name of George Floyd.''  Critics of police violence have become quick to denounce anything that smacks of victim-blaming, saying that a flawed past or an unwillingness to submit to police control should not be a death sentence.  As a general rule, the past ''bad acts'' of victims are not allowed in the courtroom, any more than those of the accused are, to prevent jurors from making judgments based on past behavior rather than the evidence in the case at hand. But there are exceptions, and victims of police violence have been called out for drug use, failure to pay child support and domestic violence and even been compared -- unfavorably -- to a Boy Scout.  In the Chauvin case, the defense lawyer, Eric J. Nelson, argued that he needed to present Mr. Floyd's past arrests to show a pattern of behavior. And evidence of Mr. Floyd's drug use underscored the arguments that Mr. Chauvin was dealing with an unpredictable subject and that the drugs contributed to Mr. Floyd's death, Mr. Nelson said.  In the case of Mr. Blake, who the authorities say was armed with a knife when Officer Rusten Sheskey shot him in the back last year, the district attorney referenced a history of domestic violence allegations against Mr. Blake at a news conference announcing his decision not to file charges.  In an email to The new_york_times, Michael D. Graveley, the Kenosha County District Attorney, explained that he was attempting to help the public understand why officers would take a domestic abuse call so seriously.  ''I agree with those who say no one should ever simply make decisions on use-of-force cases by citing individuals' prior records or contacts with police,'' Mr. Graveley wrote.  But Justin Blake, an uncle, said the portrayal was ''racist as hell.''  ''He'd rather talk about all these other different crimes that he was accused of but not convicted of,'' Justin Blake said. ''So he was painting my nephew as this big Black creature guy.''  In cases where officers are charged, what the jury hears about the victim can sway the outcome, said Jared Fishman, a former federal prosecutor.  In the state trial of Michael Slager, the white officer who fatally shot Walter Scott, a Black forklift driver, in the back while he ran away in South Carolina in 2015, defense lawyers called Mr. Scott ''out of control.'' They alluded to trace amounts of cocaine found in his system, implied that someone with ''good intent'' would not owe child support, as Mr. Scott did, and evoked testimony that Mr. Scott was dangerous based on a decades-old conviction for carrying a ''bludgeon.''  The jury was unable to reach a verdict. The Justice Department then pursued a federal civil rights case, led by Mr. Fishman, in which prosecutors were able to persuade a judge to keep much of that out of any trial. ''We destroyed his defense in pretrial hearings,'' Mr. Fishman said. Mr. Slager pleaded guilty and is serving a 20-year sentence.  In the Laquan McDonald case, a video showed Laquan, 17, walking away with a knife when Officer Jason Van Dyke fired 16 shots. The defense was allowed to bolster its case with testimony from six witnesses, most of whom worked at a juvenile detention center, about previous incidents that the defense believed showed that Laquan had a ''propensity for violence.'' The court allowed the testimony even though Mr. Van Dyke was not aware of the incidents at the time of the shooting.  At trial the defense said Laquan had been on a ''wild rampage,'' and suggested that the killing might have been unjustified had it been a ''kid in a Boy Scout uniform,'' rather than Laquan, walking down the street with a knife. The jury convicted Mr. Van Dyke of murder.  In the Twin Cities, comparisons have been drawn between Mr. Chauvin's trial and that of Jeronimo Yanez, who shot and killed Philando Castile with his girlfriend and 4-year-old daughter in the car. The judge allowed jury instructions that referred to Mr. Castile's marijuana use and whether his own negligence was a factor in his death. Mr. Yanez was acquitted.  Mr. Chauvin's lawyer proposed similar jury instructions, but Judge Peter A. Cahill rejected them.  In the Van Dyke case, the judge said prosecutors could not refer to Laquan as a victim. In the Chauvin trial, Judge Cahill said he would allow it, but would prefer if he were simply called ''Mr. Floyd.''  Prosecutors acknowledged Mr. Floyd's struggle with drug abuse head on, placing it within the context of America's ongoing opioid addiction crisis. Mr. Floyd's girlfriend, Courteney Ross, testified about their shared struggle and attempts to get clean. Mr. Floyd's brother, Philonise, wept on the witness stand as he spoke about Mr. Floyd's love for their mother.  And prosecutors roundly rejected suggestions by the defense that Mr. Floyd displayed ''superhuman'' strength.  ''Those people don't exist,'' Mr. Schleicher told jurors during his closing. ''Humans feel pain.''  He later added: ''The act of being large -- it's not a crime. It's not a threat.''  Mr. Schleicher also challenged the common assumption that struggling with the police equates to resisting. He told jurors that Mr. Floyd's refusal to get into a police car was not resistance, but a result of his anxiety that the officers should have had some empathy toward.  Judge Cahill rejected many of the defense's attempts to present evidence of Mr. Floyd's drug use and past arrests.  ''What I think the defense did was put on an old-school, pre-2020 defense,'' said Paul Butler, a former federal prosecutor who is a professor at Georgetown Law School and an expert on policing and race. ''Hopefully that defense of dehumanizing African-American victims and putting the victim on trial, hopefully that defense is relegated to history.''  But there is healthy skepticism about whether Mr. Chauvin's trial represents a turning point in how Black victims are portrayed.  ''I think it's just an exception,'' said Justin Blake, pointing to the Minneapolis police chief, who quickly fired the officers accused of killing Mr. Floyd, and the special prosecutor, who was a civil rights lawyer, as helping to set a different tone.  Many factors aligned against Mr. Chauvin -- from the gruesome video of him kneeling on Mr. Floyd to the liberal city where it happened to Minnesota's allowance of so-called ''spark of life'' testimony that allows the family and friends of victims to tell jurors about their loved ones.  Keith Ellison, the attorney general, took over the prosecution of the case from the county prosecutor. He brought with him a background as a civil rights lawyer and a team of private attorneys rather than workaday prosecutors who have close ties to law enforcement.  ''They had a comfort level in humanizing George Floyd that I generally think prosecutors don't have the same comfort level,'' said Andrew Gordon, the deputy director of the Legal Rights Center, a nonprofit in Minneapolis that provides defense counsel for indigent defendants.  Bridgett Floyd, one of Mr. Floyd's sisters, said the prosecution did a good job of introducing George Perry Floyd Jr. to the jury.  ''I feel like they walked away wishing that they could have met my brother, because of all the great things people had to say about him,'' she said. ''Because that's who he really was -- he was not all the things the defense was making him out to be.''  Outside the Hennepin County Government Center on Tuesday after Derek Chauvin was found guilty of murdering George Floyd. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSHUA RASHAAD MCFADDEN FOR THE new_york_times); Justin Blake, second from right, uncle of the police shooting victim Jacob Blake, at a rally in Kenosha, Wis., in September. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHANG W. LEE/THE new_york_times); A July protest in St. Anthony, Minn., honoring Philando Castile, fatally shot in a car by an officer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN MATUREN/GETTY IMAGES) (A21)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005i "
183		"   NEWS ANALYSIS  Terrorism Fears Feed the Rise of France's Extreme Right  By Roger Cohen  1,004 words 25 April 2021   12     The far-right leader Marine Le Pen called for ''hundreds of thousands of illegals'' to be deported. Her message resonates after the fatal stabbing of a police officer on Friday.  PARIS -- ''Marine Le Pen does not have to say anything,'' said Alain Frachon, a former editor of the French daily Le Monde. ''Each time France is hit by terrorism, the extreme right benefits.''  Mr. Frachon was reflecting on the fatal stabbing Friday of a police officer by a Tunisian immigrant who had been in France for a decade without legal status before securing authorization to stay in 2019 and a temporary residence permit last year.  In fact, Ms. Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Rally, did say something. She told the BFM-TV news network that France needs ''to expel hundreds of thousands of illegals in France. We need to return to reason. Support our police, expel the illegals, eradicate Islamism.''  How, she asked, was it possible for ''somebody who was illegally here for 10 years to have his situation regularized?''  In France, where tensions are simmering after a series of terrorist attacks, Ms. Le Pen's rhetoric resonates. The left, which is in tatters, bereft of an effective leader or message, appears to have no answer for the moment.  France is divided between vehement supporters of the police on the right, who view the force as beleaguered by the government and exposed to the double threat of vandalism and Islamist terrorism, and a left that has focused on repeated cases of police violence and the state of some French Muslims in ghettoized suburbs of misery.  In the attack on Friday, a 49-year-old police officer, identified only as Stéphanie and a mother of two, was stabbed in the neck in Rambouillet, a prosperous town southwest of Paris known for the beautiful grounds of its chateau. Her death will further sharpen this social battle, with its clear echoes of American divisions over the role of the police.  The police shot and killed the 36-year-old Tunisian man identified as the attacker. He was not known to French domestic intelligence services.  Jean-François Ricard, France's top antiterrorism prosecutor, said that ''the words uttered by the assailant'' at the time of the stabbing indicated it was a terrorist attack. He did not specifically confirm reports that the attacker shouted ''Allahu Akbar,'' or God is great, in Arabic.  Agence France-Presse, the news agency, reported that the social media posts of the assailant, identified only as Jamel, were often dedicated to denunciations of Islamophobia in France and attacks on prominent right-wing commentators, including Eric Zemmour, the author of the best-selling book ''The French Suicide.''  More recently, those posts were dominated by verses from the Quran. Days after the beheading six months ago of a teacher, Samuel Paty, who had shown cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed to a class on free speech, the assailant had joined a campaign titled ''Respect Mohammed, Prophet of God,'' the agency reported.  It was not clear, as a wide-ranging police investigation began, whether the man, who was living in Rambouillet, had acted alone. Several recent terrorist incidents have involved self-radicalized individuals who have proved hard for the French authorities to trace.  President Emmanuel Macron reacted to the killing with vows to fight on unbowed against ''Islamist terrorism.'' Before the killing, he had promised in an interview with Le Figaro to recruit an additional 10,000 police officers and gendarmes, a reflection of his determination to uphold ''the right to a peaceful life.'' This phrase was quickly mocked after the stabbing.  ''A peaceful life, Emmanuel Macron?'' Guillaume Peltier of the center-right Republicans wrote on Twitter, accusing the president of ''an inexcusable renunciation of courage and action.'' As for Ms. Le Pen, she was blunt: ''France cannot stand this any longer.''  Mr. Macron, a centrist, has tilted to the right given the apparent absence of any threat from the left, and has identified ''Islamist separatism'' as a threat to the Republic. A bill still before Parliament aims to counter the sources of radicalization in France's large Muslim population.  Attacked by the right as too mild and by the left as a twisting of France's secular model into an instrument of anti-Muslim action, it has illustrated the country's ever-sharpening fractures.  Opinion polls on next year's presidential election show Ms. Le Pen, who has dropped calls for France to exit the European Union and the euro as part of an effort to bring her message closer to the mainstream, in a tight race with Mr. Macron.  A runoff between the two of them is seen as the most likely scenario for the second round of the vote. Because many disillusioned, left-of-center Macron voters in 2017 say they will under no circumstances vote for him again, assumptions that France would never lurch to the far right now appear more fragile.  Still, it is hard to gauge sentiment in a country still under lockdown in a bid to counter the pandemic. For the moment, tensions are partly held in check by the difficulty of getting around or getting out. As these restrictions lift over the summer, battle lines will become clearer.  In particular, the success of Ms. Le Pen's strenuous efforts to bring about what commentators in the country have called her ''banalization'' -- the masking or softening of any rightist threat through a quiet tone and some more moderate policies -- is expected to emerge.  Certainly, if nothing else, her call after this latest stabbing for ''hundreds of thousands of illegals'' to be deported, summoning visions of mass repatriations and chaos, was a reminder of what endures behind her ever-blander persona.  A street blocked off near the police station in Rambouillet, France, after an officer was killed on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bertrand Guay/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005j "
184		"    A New Trove of Discoveries in Egypt, but Few Foreigners to See It  By Abdi Latif Dahir  1,533 words 25 April 2021   12     Tourism in Egypt has been buffeted by political instability and terrorism. But the pandemic has dealt the industry its biggest blow in years.  CAIRO -- On a cool morning last November, Egypt's tourism and antiquities minister stood in a packed tent at the vast necropolis of Saqqara just outside Cairo to reveal the ancient site's largest archaeological discovery of the year.  The giant trove included 100 wooden coffins -- some containing mummies interred over 2,500 years ago -- 40 statues, amulets, canopic jars and funerary masks. The minister, Khaled el-Enany, said the latest findings hinted at the great potential of the ancient site and showcased the dedication of the all-Egyptian team that unearthed the gilded artifacts.  But he also singled out another reason the archaeological discoveries were crucial: it was a boon for tourism, which had been decimated by the coronavirus pandemic.  ''This unique site is still hiding a lot,'' Mr. el-Enany said. ''The more discoveries we make, the more interest there is in this site and in Egypt worldwide.''  Egyptology is having a big moment: Archaeologists announced this month that they had unearthed an ancient Pharaonic city near the southern city of Luxor that dated back more than 3,400 years.  The discovery came just days after 22 royal mummies were moved to a new museum in a lavish spectacle that was broadcast worldwide. In addition, the discovery of 59 beautifully preserved sarcophagi in Saqqara is now the subject of a recent Netflix documentary; a bejeweled statue of the god Nefertum was found in Saqqara; the 4,700-year-old Djoser's Step Pyramid was reopened last year after a 14-year, $6.6 million restoration; and progress is apace on the stunning Grand Egyptian Museum, scheduled to open sometime this year.  But the pandemic has dealt a severe blow to the industry, and what had been expected to be a bonanza season became a bleak winter.  Tourism is a crucial part of Egypt's economy -- international tourism revenues totaled $13 billion in 2019 -- and the country has been eager to attract visitors back to its archaeological sites.  With travel restrictions, border closings and reduced capacity at hotels, international visitors to Egypt dropped by 69 percent in the first eight months of 2020 alone while revenues plunged by 67 percent in the same period, according to the World Tourism Organization, a United Nations agency.  Now more than ever, tourism in Egypt is facing ''an unprecedented challenge,'' Zurab Pololikashvili, the organization's secretary general said in an email.  In recent years, Egypt's tourism has been adversely affected by a string of misfortunes, starting with the political instability that followed the 2011 revolution and occasional bursts of terrorism, including attacks on tourists, bomb blasts that damaged prominent museums and a downed airliner that killed hundreds of Russian tourists in 2015.  But the sector was steadily recovering, with visitors attracted by both antiquities and the sun-and-sea offerings, growing to over 13 million in 2019 from 5.3 million in 2016. The coronavirus pandemic has reversed these gains, leaving hotels, resorts and cruises empty, popular sites without visitors and revenue, and thousands of tour guides and vendors with drastically reduced incomes or none at all.  ''Tourism in Egypt just had one of its best years in 2019 and then came the pandemic which severely impacted it all,'' Amr Karim, the general manager for Travco Travel, one of Egypt's largest tour operators, said in a telephone interview. ''Nobody knew what would happen, how we will handle it, how it will affect us. It's strange.''  The pandemic, he said, disrupted how tour companies operated, how they priced their packages and how to work with hotels and abide by their new hygiene playbooks.  The pandemic also exposed the fragility of Egypt's health care system, with doctors lamenting shortages in protective equipment and testing kits while patients died from lack of oxygen. With over 12,000 deaths, Egypt also recorded one of the highest fatality rates from the virus in the Arab world.  With a growing number of cases, health officials in Egypt have recently warned of a third wave of the virus. Authorities have also canceled large gatherings and festivals, and promised to fine those not complying with protective measures like mask-wearing, but many Egyptians do not abide by these rules.  Travelers are required to have a negative Covid-19 test taken 72 hours before arriving in Egypt, and hotels are mandated to operate at half capacity.  The crisis affected not just big companies like Travco but also smaller ones that had started betting big on the growing tourism industry.  Passainte Assem established Why Not Egypt, a boutique travel agency, in 2017 by interviewing prospective travelers and customizing itineraries for them. But after the pandemic began, most of her clients, who are from Australia, Canada and the United States, canceled their plans, she said, pushing her to suspend the business for now.  The experience left her feeling that ''tourism is not stable at all,'' she said. ''It cannot be the only source of income. I have to have a side hustle.''  She now works as a manager of a company trying to revive and preserve traditional Egyptian handicrafts.  With shrinking bookings, the government has stepped in to cushion the blow to the tourism sector. Authorities introduced a raft of measures including allowing certain tourism-dependent businesses like hotels and resorts to delay the payment of utility bills, rescheduling debt repayments and providing financial aid to tourism workers.  The government has also sought to attract travelers by reducing the cost of tourist visas and entrance fees to archaeological sites, and has created programs aimed at increasing domestic tourism to make up for the lack of foreign tourists. A winter promotion, for instance, offered Egyptians discounts on domestic plane travel, hotels and museum admissions.  But Ahmed Samir, chief executive of the tour company Egypt Tours Portal, said the direct cash support for tourism workers was minimal. With reduced bookings, he was able to keep his employees in his marketing and social media departments on the payroll but at half salary.  ''As a kind of sympathy to my employees, we tried to balance,'' he said. But still, he added, ''most of my friends' companies closed completely.''  The slowdown in tourist arrivals has left areas usually swamped by tourists quiet.  At the Egyptian Museum in downtown Cairo, Mahrous Abu Seif, a tour guide, sat waiting for clients one morning. A few small tour groups, including from Russia and China, were going through metal detector scans to go into the museum. But he hoped that more clients would come.  ''What can I tell you? We sit here and wait and wait,'' he said, throwing his hands in the air and adjusting his sunglasses. ''We don't know what the future holds.''  On the other side of town, at the historic El Fishawy coffee house, a few locals gurgled their water pipes and drank mint tea or Turkish coffee while melodious Quran recitation ascended from a nearby speaker. Located in the centuries-old Khan el Khalili market, the cafe, along with souvenir and jewelry shops, was hit badly by the pandemic.  ''I used to bring people here and it would be packed, but look at it now,'' Mohamed Said Rehan, a guide with a local company, said of the cafe. ''The pandemic is a big problem.''  Mr. Rehan said that he knows many colleagues and friends who had to stay home for months without income or who left the industry altogether. But he still clings to a thread of hope that tourism will pick up soon.  And some tourists have indeed started coming back.  In February, Marcus Zimmermann, a 43-year-old architect from Germany, was visiting Egypt for the first time, stopping first in Cairo and planning trips to the southern city of Luxor, home to the iconic Valley of the Kings. Mr. Zimmermann had hoped to come to Egypt last year with his mother, who dreamed of being an archaeologist, for her 70th birthday. But they had to cancel their plans because of the pandemic.  This year, he decided to come alone but promised to ''plan the trip again'' with her once she's vaccinated.  Even though it will be tough attaining the prepandemic figures quickly, people like Mr. Karim who work in the industry hope tourists will start coming back by year's end.  With all the new discoveries, renovations and the planned opening of new sites and museums, tourists will gradually flock back to Egypt, he said.  ''People will start to move. People will start to travel,'' he said. ''I am optimistic.''  Nada Rashwan and Asmaa Al Zohairy contributed reporting.  Nada Rashwan and Asmaa Al Zohairy contributed reporting.  Locals visiting the Sphinx in Giza. Left, dozens of newly discovered sarcophagi at the necropolis of Saqqara. International tourism, a mainstay of Egypt's economy, has plunged in the pandemic.; Cairo's famous El Fishawy coffee house, which would normally be packed with tourists. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SIMA DIAB FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005h "
185		"    Post-Trump Ethics Measures Idle on Back Burner as Voting Battles Rage  By Elizabeth Williamson  1,506 words 25 April 2021   27     After the Trump presidency, democracy activists and many Democrats seized a moment to rebuild constitutional guardrails, but the effort could die in the face of a larger fight over voting rights.  WASHINGTON -- After Donald J. Trump lost the election and was impeached for his role in the Capitol riot, democracy preservation groups pointed with urgency to what they called a last, best chance to address the holes in the Constitution exposed by his presidency.  But a suite of legislative responses, like requiring the release of presidential tax returns and barring presidents from channeling government money to their private businesses, is now hostage in the Senate to a more public fight over voting rights. And competing priorities of President Biden's may ensure that the moment to fortify constitutional guardrails that Mr. Trump plowed through may already have passed.  Most Democrats and a coalition of watchdog groups say the ethics and voting rights sections in a sprawling Senate bill known as the For the People Act, or S.1., should remain intact and entwined. But solid Republican opposition to the legislation's voter access proposals threatens less debated elements in the measure, part of what was envisioned to be the most comprehensive ethics overhaul since Watergate.  Even Democratic support for the bill has begun to splinter, as the Congressional Black Caucus and some advocacy groups pivot from the full 800-page legislation to pushing for narrower proposals.  ''It's hard to move many things simultaneously through the Senate, and you have a president who is rightly first focused on Covid relief and next focused on infrastructure,'' said Max Stier, who leads the Partnership for Public Service, which champions a more effective federal work force. ''I worry that important issues like ethics reform don't make the cut.''  The measure will undergo changes in a formal drafting on May 11 by the Senate Rules Committee that aims to clarify confusing provisions, conflicting deadlines and redundancies. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, vowed last month to bring the full bill to a vote. ''If our democracy doesn't work, then we have no hope -- no hope -- of solving any of our other problems,'' he said.  The act would expand voting access, curb partisan gerrymandering and curtail the influence of secret donors, special interests and foreign governments in American elections, all hot-button issues that Republican leaders strongly oppose.  ''This is clearly an effort by one party to rewrite the rules of our political system,'' Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said last month in a hearing on the bill. ''This legislation would forcibly rewrite the election laws in all 50 states.''  The bill's presidential ethics section is less contested. Major party candidates for president and vice president would have to release 10 years' worth of personal and business tax returns. The president's and vice president's exemption from executive branch conflict-of-interest rules would end. Presidents would be required to place personal financial holdings in a blind trust or limit them to assets that pose no conflict. And federal spending at businesses owned or controlled by the president, vice president, cabinet or their family members would be tightly controlled.  To guard against a president pressuring appointees to interfere in government proceedings involving the president, it would require political appointees to turn such matters over to career staff. The act also addresses the Trump administration's open flouting of ethics laws already on the books, by granting more power to enforcement bodies like the Office of Government Ethics.  Such provisions have received scant public discussion, but with Republicans dead set against unrelated voting provisions, the legislation appears to have no chance of passing the Senate under current rules, which would require at least 10 Republicans to support it.  ''Someone could pull out the ethics portion and see if they could get support,'' said Richard L. Hasen, a law and political science professor at the University of California, Irvine, and an expert in election and campaign finance law. ''But usually it takes a scandal to get people moving on ethics reform.''  And three months into the Biden era, the Trump presidency is already receding.  Democratic leaders have so far spurned behind-the-scenes suggestions by some lawmakers and watchdog groups to separate the voting and ethics titles, to give the ethics measure a better shot at passage.  ''If we win ethics reforms but still allow politicians to pick and choose their voters or billionaires to buy elections, we will still see a government that prioritizes the needs of special interests over working families,'' Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon and the bill's lead sponsor in the Senate, said in a statement. ''The reason the For the People Act was crafted as a singular package is because each of these interlocking parts works together to return power to the people.''  The act's voting access measures would allow online, same-day and automatic voter registration, and require the use of paper ballots as a safeguard against fraud. It takes aim at partisan gerrymandering by standardizing rules and opening the process of congressional redistricting to the public. The act would broaden disclosure requirements for campaign and presidential inaugural committee contributions by nonprofit groups and publicly listed companies.  Its ethics provisions go beyond the executive branch. It would require the entire federal judiciary, including Supreme Court justices, to create a code of ethics within a year of the bill's enactment. It would tighten reporting and other rules governing lobbying on behalf of foreign governments.  For Congress, the bill would impose fuller disclosure of lawmakers' outside income, require congressional candidates to disclose whether individual campaign donors are lobbyists, prohibit House members from serving on the boards of for-profit companies, and bar House and Senate members and their staff aides from working to advance legislation that would benefit their or their families' personal financial interests. It would also bar lawmakers from using taxpayer money to pay damages awarded in discrimination and sexual misconduct cases.  ''It's critically important that the For the People Act remain big, bold and together,'' said Aaron Scherb, the director of legislative affairs for Common Cause, one of several groups working with Democrats on the bill, adding, ''People don't want piecemeal solutions to comprehensive problems.''  But insisting on it all, at this point, could mean getting nothing, and talk is percolating that the ethics measures should not be allowed to die with the broader bill. Danielle Brian, the executive director at the Project on Government Oversight, says the group has been working on salvaging some of the bill's ethics proposals, some which might not need Congress at all.  ''We are focusing on pushing those ethics reforms that are in the bill that the Biden administration could be implementing without legislation, right away,'' she said.  For example, the group has been pressing for the creation of a centralized records database on the Office of Government Ethics public website that would open financial and other disclosures filed by executive branch nominees to greater scrutiny. Mr. Stier said the Partnership for Public Service had thrown its weight behind another Trump corrective, the Accountability for Acting Officials Act, which would prohibit acting agency chiefs from serving more than 120 days, and would require acting inspectors general to possess relevant qualifications.  Ms. Brian's group has advocated several ethics proposals contained in a separate, expansive ethics bill, the Protecting Our Democracy Act, which is being updated in the House. It, too, would require candidates for president to release 10 years of tax returns, while beefing up protections for whistle-blowers and inspectors general, barring presidents from pardoning themselves and prohibiting presidents and vice presidents from receiving gifts, called emoluments in the Constitution, from foreign nations without congressional consent. The bill defines emoluments to include payments arising from commercial transactions, clarifying vague constitutional language that Mr. Trump and his family ignored as they profited from his presidency.  The bill would also strengthen enforcement of the Hatch Act, which prohibits executive branch employees from engaging in partisan political activity, in part by fining violators up to $50,000 per transgression.  But that bill's timing remains uncertain, while its chief architect, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the Intelligence Committee chairman, leads an investigation into the Jan. 6 riot at the Capitol.  Mr. Schiff's whipsawing from one Trump-inspired affront to democracy to another underscores Congress's dilemma. It cannot fix everything at once, even with bipartisan cooperation.  ''Trump flooded the zone with so much norm-breaking and in some cases sheer illegality -- the question is where to prioritize,'' Mr. Hasen said. ''You've kind of got to decide where your battles are going to be.''  Most Democrats would like to preserve the ethics sections of a sprawling bill, sponsored in part by Senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005e "
186		"    The Two Crises of Conservatism  By Ross Douthat  963 words 25 April 2021   7     The G.O.P. doesn't know how to win majorities; the right doesn't know what it's conserving anymore.  For the last few months I've been one of the teachers for a Yale course entitled ''The Crisis of Liberalism,'' about recent challenges to the liberal order from populists and progressives, socialists and nationalists, the further left and right.  As a somewhat sweeping class, it contains a number of stories that by themselves could take up a semester's worth of wrangling. One is about the strange condition of American conservatism, in which two crises, one normal and one existential, are happening at once.  The normal crisis is a party crisis, the sort that afflicts all political coalitions. The Republican Party 40 years ago coalesced around a set of appeals that enabled its leaders to win large presidential majorities and set the national agenda. At a certain point the issue landscape changed, so did the country's demographics, and the G.O.P. has struggled to adapt -- cycling through compassionate conservatism, Tea Party conservatism and Trumpist populism without reproducing Ronald Reagan's success.  Seen from this vantage point, the Republican Party's current craziness comes from being in an extended, Groundhog Day version of the Democratic Party's 1980s situation, in which the party's rebuilds keep failing, but our era's greater partisan polarization still keeps the right electorally competitive. In which case you can imagine, eventually, a potentially normal resolution, in which Republicans adapt and win real popular majorities again, or fail and diminish into true minority status until their craziness abates.  But beneath this party crisis there is the deeper one, having to do with what conservatism under a liberal order exists to actually conserve.  One powerful answer is that conservatism-under-liberalism should defend human goods that are threatened by liberal ideas taken to extremes. The family, when liberal freedom becomes a corrosive hyper-individualism. Traditional religion, when liberal toleration becomes a militant and superstitious secularism. Local community and local knowledge, against expert certainty and bureaucratic centralization. Artistic and intellectual greatness, when democratic taste turns philistine or liberal intellectuals become apparatchiks. The individual talent of the entrepreneur or businessman, against the leveling impulses of egalitarianism and the stultifying power of monopoly.  Needless to say the right hasn't always fought these battles well or wisely. But the fights have given conservatives a clear stake in the liberal order, a reason to be invested in its institutions and controversies even if, on occasion, they might doubt that some of its premises are true.  So the question, then, is what happens when the reasons for that investment weaken, when the things the right imagines itself conserving seem to slip away?  What does it mean to conserve the family in an era when not just the two-parent household but childbearing and sex itself are in eclipse? What does it mean to defend traditional religion in a country where institutional faith is either bunkered or rapidly declining? How do you defend localism when the internet seems to nationalize every political and cultural debate? What does the conservation of the West's humanistic traditions mean when pop repetition rules the culture, and the great universities are increasingly hostile to even the Democratic-voting sort of cultural conservative?  At least you can still defend the heroic entrepreneur, say the libertarians -- except that the last great surge of business creativity swiftly congealed into the stultifying monopolies of Silicon Valley, which are leading the general corporate turn against cultural and religious forms of conservatism as well.  This set of problems explains the mix of radicalism, factionalism, ferment and performance art that characterizes the contemporary right. What are we actually conserving anymore? is the question, and the answers range from the antiquarian (the Electoral College!) to the toxic (a white-identitarian conception of America) to the crudely partisan (the right to gerrymander) to the most basic and satisfying: Whatever the libs are against, we're for.  On the center and the liberal center-right, meanwhile, there's a sense that the way out of this mess is for decent conservatives to recommit to the liberal order -- ''to organize and draw a bright line between themselves and the illiberals on their own side,'' as my colleague David Brooks put it this week.  But that might not be enough. In the end, conservatives need to believe the things they love can flourish within the liberal order, and it isn't irrational to turn reactionary if things you thought you were conserving fall away.  So the question for the right isn't one of commitment, but capacity. Can conservative energies be turned away from fratricide and lib-baiting and used to rebuild the structures and institutions and habits whose decline has pushed the right toward crisis? And will liberal institutions, in their increasingly ideological form, allow or encourage that to happen, or stand permanently in its way?  In prior columns I've stressed how the weakness of conservatism makes it hard to imagine a successful right-wing insurrection or coup against the liberal order.  But weakness has rippling consequences too, and a conservatism defined by despair and disillusionment could remain central to liberalism's crises for many years to come.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTOpinion) and Instagram .  People protesting Covid-19 restrictions held up an American flag in Salem, Ore., in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATHAN HOWARD/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005g "
187		"    His Approval Rating Is Down, but Cuomo Still Has Path to Fourth Term  By Nate Cohn  1,439 words 25 April 2021   26     Allegations of sexual harassment have hurt Gov. Andrew Cuomo's favorability rating. But 57 percent of Democrats say he is doing a good job, a new poll shows, enough support to give him a decent chance at a fourth term.  Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York has not had much good news over the past few months. His poll numbers have not been much of an exception.  A new Siena College poll this week found that Mr. Cuomo's ratings had fallen to the lowest level of his tenure, with allegations of sexual harassment continuing to erode his support.  But for Mr. Cuomo, the worst poll numbers of his time as governor may still be enough to win re-election. His ratings are worse than they were in early 2014 or 2018, when he went on to win easily, but not by so much that it would make him an obvious underdog in pursuit of a fourth term.  The governor's favorability rating among Democrats in the Siena poll was 56 percent, while 37 percent had an unfavorable view of him. The poll found that registered Democrats were divided on whether they would vote to re-elect Mr. Cuomo. By these measures, Mr. Cuomo is more vulnerable than he was four years ago, but he has not lost so much ground as to close off his path to renomination, either.  And by another measure, Mr. Cuomo's position is also stronger now than it was in 2018: 57 percent of Democrats say he is doing a good or excellent job as governor.  That Mr. Cuomo could still win is not an indication of any great political resilience. Nor does it imply he is an overwhelming favorite, even without considering whether his standing may diminish further with new revelations.  Much will depend on the conclusions of several investigations that are underway, including one by the F.B.I. on whether his administration provided false data on deaths from Covid-19 in nursing homes, and another by New York's attorney general, Letitia James, into the sexual harassment allegations. Findings by Ms. James that lead to an embarrassing impeachment trial could prompt more voters to shun him.  Yet so far, Mr. Cuomo maintains enough support to have a good chance to prevail. If he does in the final account, he will have overcome allegations of impropriety -- and a pummeling from progressive activists on social media -- with persistent support from the rank-and-file of the Democratic Party.  In some ways, Mr. Cuomo's popularity at the peak of the pandemic -- when he was earning raves for his daily updates -- was an exception to the general rule of his tenure. He has often had fairly weak ratings, at least for the governor of a blue state.  In April 2018, as Mr. Cuomo was vying for re-election, a Siena College poll found that just 62 percent of registered Democrats in New York had a favorable view of the governor, while 32 percent had an unfavorable view of him. Only 57 percent of Democrats said they would vote to re-elect him, while 32 percent said they would prefer someone else. Just 53 percent thought he was doing a good or excellent job.  In the end, Mr. Cuomo won renomination with 64 percent of the vote. His 34 point margin of victory over Cynthia Nixon was slightly larger than his plus-30 favorability rating or the 24 point margin by which Democrats said they would prefer to re-elect him over someone else.  It would be a mistake to assume on this basis that Mr. Cuomo is a clear favorite to win the primary so long as his ratings stay above water among Democrats. Indeed, Democrats are divided on whether they want to re-elect Mr. Cuomo, with only 46 percent saying they prefer to vote to re-elect him and 43 percent saying they would prefer someone else.  Why is Mr. Cuomo still competitive for renomination? One factor is that New York Democrats remain equivocal about the severity or veracity of the allegations against him.  Democrats continue to believe Mr. Cuomo has done a good job handling the pandemic in New York, despite the revelation that his administration has hid data about the death toll in nursing homes. While 59 percent in the Siena poll say he has done either a poor or ''fair'' job of making public all data about such deaths, a sizable 34 percent of registered Democrats believe that he has done a good or excellent job of making such data available. And a 64 percent majority of Democrats continue to say that Mr. Cuomo has, in general, done a good or excellent job of providing information during the pandemic.  Democrats are even more divided on the multiple allegations of sexual harassment against Mr. Cuomo, which he has denied. Just 39 percent believe he has committed sexual harassment, the Siena poll showed, while 30 percent disagree and another 30 percent are not sure. The precipitous decline in his favorability ratings since the allegations became public suggest that many Democrats take the charges seriously and have re-evaluated him on that basis, but a larger number of Democrats are not ready to go so far. Most Democrats say they are satisfied with how he has addressed the allegations and do not support his immediate resignation.  Perhaps the hesitancy of some New York Democrats to believe the allegations against Mr. Cuomo simply reflects their dispassionate read of the evidence. It might also be a reflection of the loyalty of the state's rank-and-file Democratic voters to Mr. Cuomo.  After all, many more registered Republicans believe the allegations against Mr. Cuomo than registered Democrats, a powerful reminder of the role of partisanship in shaping public opinion. Liberals, who generally argue that women should be believed when they allege sexual harassment, are the likeliest ideological group to say they do not believe Mr. Cuomo has committed sexual harassment. A majority of conservatives and Republicans, in contrast, believe the allegations.  Mr. Cuomo's resilience is also a reminder that New York Democrats are fairly moderate, despite counting some of the nation's most famous progressive politicians, like Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, and a thriving Democratic Socialist left among their ranks. In recent Democratic primaries, New Yorkers backed Hillary Clinton and Mr. Cuomo over idealistic, reformist, good-government progressive challengers.  Mr. Cuomo and other establishment-backed Democrats have often won with considerable support from nonwhite voters, especially those who are Black, in New York City, who often hold relatively moderate views on cultural and ideological issues compared with those of white progressives. And of all of the demographic groups surveyed in the Siena poll, Black voters, regardless of party registration, were the likeliest to have a favorable view of Mr. Cuomo or say he has not committed sexual harassment.  Mr. Cuomo's path to winning the general election is straightforward: capitalize on New York's Democratic lean. The Siena College poll found that registered voters in the state said they preferred a Democrat for governor over a Republican by a 20 percentage point margin, presumably making it quite difficult for any Republican to win the general election.  Difficult does not mean impossible. It is not wholly uncommon for Democratic states to elect Republican governors, or vice versa. The three states where President Biden's performed the strongest -- Vermont, Massachusetts and Maryland -- all have Republican governors, albeit moderate ones; the Democratic governors of Kansas, Kentucky and Louisiana offer examples on the other side of the political spectrum.  Mr. Cuomo's ratings are weak enough statewide that he could be vulnerable against a strong and moderate Republican challenger, who would probably need to accede to the state's prevailing cultural views, perhaps even on abortion and Donald Trump's presidency. Most of the Republican contenders so far do not fit into that category. Many have strong ties to national Republican politics, including several House Republicans and even Andrew Giuliani.  There's still time for a stronger challenger to emerge, but for now it is not easy to identify someone comparable to the three anti-Trump Republicans who currently govern blue states.  In the final account, the most powerful force to help Mr. Cuomo overcome allegations of sexual harassment may be the partisan loyalty of Democratic voters in a blue state.  The fate of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo could rest with the findings of several ongoing investigations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHANG W. LEE/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005d "
188		"    Climate Goals Carry Big Risk Or a Big Payoff  By Coral Davenport, Lisa Friedman and Jim Tankersley  1,939 words 25 April 2021   1     The president's plans to cut emissions in half by 2030 relies heavily on a government effort to steer the development of new industries, but business leaders are fretting over the rapid timeline.  WASHINGTON -- President Biden's pledge to cut America's climate warming emissions in half by 2030 is technologically feasible and, scientists say, ecologically imperative. Economically, it could be a gamble.  The speed of the president's promised transformation to an economy far less reliant on fossil fuels risks exposing vulnerabilities in the nation's electricity system and unsettling its transportation sector, while potentially increasing American reliance on goods imported from China. Utility chiefs say they could handle the transition over a slightly longer timeline, but they warn of rolling blackouts to meet the president's 2030 target. General Motors said it will sell only vehicles that have zero tailpipe emissions by 2035; the 2030 date has autoworkers worrying about steep job losses.  But if Mr. Biden can orchestrate the seamless transition that he is promising, the rewards could be high: lower risk of catastrophic climate change, a burst of new middle-class jobs and renewed global leadership for American companies in the industries administration officials believe will define the rest of the 21st century.  The president's pledge, made at the start of a two-day climate summit hosted by the White House, represents perhaps the greatest bet in recent American history on what economists call industrial policy, the idea that the government can steer the development of jobs and industries in the economy.  Mr. Biden and his advisers, backed by several economic analyses, believe they can spend enough federal money and sufficiently regulate the economy to vault America's manufacturers and research laboratories to the head of a global race to a low-emission future, while adding jobs and raising worker pay.  White House aides say the energy transition is coming and Mr. Biden's path is the only way to avoid the kind of economic damage American workers experienced in the early 2000s, when automation and globalization claimed millions of manufacturing jobs and America's leaders seemed powerless to replace them.  On Friday Mr. Biden's Council of Economic Advisers argued that failing to draw down carbon emissions will leave the United States straggling behind China.  ''As we transition to a clean energy future, we must ensure workers who have thrived in yesterday's and today's industries have as bright a tomorrow in the new industries,'' Mr. Biden said.  Yet Mr. Biden's timeline for the transition is aggressive and the political prospects for his spending and regulatory goals are uncertain.  Whether the president's environmental ambitions stunt or supercharge the economy will tie heavily into the fate of Mr. Biden's efforts to spend trillions of dollars on his proposed agenda to upgrade infrastructure and reshape the rules of American capitalism.  The president has already won a major congressional victory on economic policy and is pressing for more, in the form of a two-part, $4 trillion agenda that he hopes to sign into law this summer. The pandemic recession and its halting worldwide recovery may actually have primed the transition, by snarling global supply chains and feeding bipartisan interest in boosting American manufacturing against global competitors, especially in emerging industries.  ''Other economies are going to move, and the citizens of those countries are going to demand clean energy and products that are not made from dirty energy,'' John Kerry, Mr. Biden's global climate change envoy, said in an interview Friday.  Ali Zaidi, the deputy White House national climate adviser, said, ''We win the future for our workers and the communities they support by leading on the clean-energy transition, by running ahead of the trend, by investing in our country, so that we can innovate here, so we can manufacture here.''  But many Republicans, protective of oil, gas and coal industries and concerned about rising energy prices, hope to stop the effort.  ''I'm really concerned about the increased cost of electricity and energy if we rush too fast to replace the oil and gas industry,'' Representative Debbie Lesko, Republican of Arizona, said at a recent hearing.  Louise Carter-King, mayor of Gillette, Wyo., a state that produces 39 percent of the nation's coal, told Congress that if Mr. Biden's plans for the electricity sector come to pass, ''People won't be able to afford to turn on lights.''  Critics issued similar warnings when President Barack Obama pledged to cut emissions.  A decade ago, power plants were the nation's top source of carbon dioxide pollution. But greenhouse emissions from power plants dropped 36 percent between 2010 and 2020, thanks both to the boom in production of natural gas, which produces just half the greenhouse pollution of coal, and the rise of affordable wind and solar power, which were aided by government spending programs and regulations championed by Mr. Obama.  The cleaner energy was cheaper, too: electricity costs dropped about 14 percent in the same time, in part because the price of generating renewable power fell precipitously.  Mr. Biden's task could be more daunting. He will need to reduce emissions amid what forecasters expect to be a rapid economic rebound as coronavirus vaccinations spread. Economists expect this year to produce the fastest annual growth in a generation -- and with it, a rise in carbon pollution.  ''Make no mistake, this is a herculean task,'' Fatih Birol, the head of the International Energy Association, said on Friday, referring to collective pledges to decrease emissions.  Richard Rhodes, the energy historian whose recent book, ''Energy: A Human History,'' recounts the technologies and innovation that transformed energy over centuries, said an Italian physicist, Cesare Marchetti, discovered a hard truth in the 1970s after studying thousands of energy transitions. It takes about 50 years for any new source of energy, be it coal or oil, natural gas or renewable power, to command just 10 percent of the global market. It takes another half century after that to reach 50 percent.  That, Mr. Rhodes said, held true despite wars, economic conditions and government interventions.  White House officials say the country can defy history with a variety of paths to achieve Mr. Biden's goals, including reducing emissions from farms and city buildings. But two sectors loom large: electricity, where the president will need far more renewables, including advanced batteries to store power generated by solar panels and wind turbines; and transportation, where reliance almost exclusively on gasoline needs to shift to electricity.  Mr. Biden has proposed a carrot-heavy approach, spending on research and development, efficiency improvements in homes and schools, and the electric grid to better support renewable energy. As part of his infrastructure plans, he wants Congress to require electric utilities to shift toward lower-emission power sources.  Mr. Biden's emissions target relies on electric power plants cutting their emissions sharply by 2030 and to net zero by 2035.  ''Our analysis says we could get there by 2050,'' said Nick Akins, chief executive of American Electric Power, an Ohio-based electric utility, but not 2035.  ''If we move too quickly, we could jeopardize the reliability of the grid,'' he added, pointing to the recent rolling blackouts in Texas  Mr. Akins allowed that technology breakthroughs, perhaps facilitated by federal government policies, could change that picture.  Mr. Biden's infrastructure proposal includes $174 billion in spending to build electric vehicle charging stations, and his advisers are considering a mandate to sell only electric vehicles after 2035. G.M. has already set that target.  But autoworkers are worried; assembling a car powered by a battery requires about a third fewer people than one powered by an internal combustion engine.  ''We've been stressing a more cautious approach to electric vehicles,'' said Rory Gamble, the president of the United Auto Workers.  Mr. Biden hopes the infrastructure bill will create tax incentives to lure the makers of electric vehicle batteries to build their factories in the United States, which could create millions of new domestic manufacturing jobs. ''But if it doesn't work and doesn't take hold -- we're afraid of what could happen,'' Mr. Gamble said.  Lewis Black, chief executive of Almonty Industries, a Canadian company which produces tungsten, a key mineral in electric vehicle batteries, said he welcomes the opportunity to sell his products to American automakers. But Mr. Black, who is American, was skeptical that the United States could quickly ramp up the supply chain needed to produce electric vehicle battery parts. About 70 percent of the world's electric vehicle batteries are now built in China, and most of the minerals and materials used in making them are mined there.  ''How are you going to provide for this dramatic increase in products that you currently have not the capacity to produce?'' he said.  Other analysts are more optimistic. Leah Stokes, an energy policy expert at the University of California, Santa Barbara, called Mr. Biden's targets ''eminently doable.''  Since 2011 more than 100 coal-fired power plants have been converted to natural gas. Natural gas produces far less carbon dioxide than coal but emits methane, an equally dangerous greenhouse gas.  Earlier this month 13 electric utilities including the New York Power Authority and the Los Angeles Department of Power and Water, asked Mr. Biden to require power companies to generate a certain percentage of their electricity from wind and solar. The companies argued that such a mandate would lead to a reduction of about 80 percent of the sector's emissions by 2030.  Some regions may need more time, they wrote, but ''collectively, we believe this national level of deep decarbonization across the U.S. power sector by 2030, as a whole, is both achievable and necessary.''  Some analysts say the energy transition could produce more jobs for Americans than it kills. Some would pay worse than the lost jobs, but more would pay better. The Rhodium Group, an energy consultancy, predicted that a plan like Mr. Biden's for investments in low-emission electricity could kill more than 70,000 coal and natural gas jobs, but create nearly 550,000 new renewable energy jobs.  Heather McTeer Toney of the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy group, said she is concerned that the transition to clean energy, like past economic shifts, could leave communities of color behind unless the Biden administration looks for specific ways to make sure resources go to neighborhoods that need it most.  Recalling the economic boom that accompanied the rise of the internet, Ms. Toney said: ''Where were the Black and brown and Indigenous communities? They weren't part of the conversation. They weren't at the table.''  Still, Ms. Tony called the efforts of some industry leaders nothing more than scare tactics.  ''They really want Americans to believe there's going to be a hard stop, that you're going to go to your local Walmart one day and you're not going to be able to get gas. That's not how this is going to happen,'' she said.  President Biden's aggressive timeline for cutting emissions, which includes significantly increasing solar and wind power, is a concern to the energy sector, and autoworkers are worried about job losses as American plants convert to electric vehicles. Above from left, wind turbines and solar panels in Atlantic City, N.J., and an electric vehicle battery manufacturing facility in Hefei, China. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AL DRAGO FOR THE new_york_times; TED SHAFFREY/ASSOCIATED PRESS; ALY SONG/REUTERS) (A24)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0005b "
189		"    Feminists Lose Ground To Social Media Critics  By Sui-Lee Wee  1,354 words 25 April 2021   14     As online attacks against Chinese feminists intensify, popular social media companies are responding by removing the women -- not the abusers -- from their platforms.  The feminists' social media accounts had been slowly disappearing in China for days. And when that wasn't enough for their angry critics, a powerful voice on the internet stepped in to help.  In a discussion on the popular Chinese platform Weibo, one of the critics asked for better guidelines on how to file complaints against women who shared feminist views. The user suggested that the company add ''inciting mass confrontation'' to the list of violations that could have them removed. A Weibo account long affiliated with the company's chief executive, Wang Gaofei, joined the conversation to offer tips.  ''Here,'' the person using the account said on April 14, posting a screenshot with easy instructions for filing complaints against the women. Under ''type of complaint,'' click ''inciting hatred,'' the screenshot showed. Under specific reason: ''gender discrimination.''  Women who express feminist views on social media have long been subjected to torrents of hateful comments. In China, not only do those views attract the attention of trolls, they can also lead to getting kicked off the platforms by furious users empowered by unlikely allies: the internet companies themselves.  Several prominent Chinese feminists have had their accounts deleted from Weibo in the last two weeks following public complaints. According to the women, at least 15 accounts have been removed. The women say it is part of a growing online campaign to stamp out feminist voices in a country where the government controls the internet and social movements are swiftly cut down. Two of the women have filed lawsuits against Weibo.  ''I was speechless,'' Liang Xiaowen, an outspoken Chinese feminist, said of the screenshot. While Mr. Wang's name is not officially attached to the account, he has been identified as its owner in half a dozen state media reports and a podcast. ''He accused me of gender discrimination, which is the most laughable thing in the world,'' she said.  Ms. Liang, a 28-year-old lawyer in New York, is one of the women whose accounts were removed by Weibo. She is suing the company for violating China's civil code, saying it did not adequately explain its accusations against her.  The women's accounts first started disappearing after March 31. Two days earlier, Xiao Meili, a well-known feminist in China, had left a hot pot restaurant in the southwestern city of Chengdu, angry that a man had ignored her repeated requests to stop smoking illegally indoors. The man was so furious that he hurled a cup of hot liquid at Ms. Xiao and her friends.  Ms. Xiao, 30, later uploaded a video about the incident, prompting a groundswell of support that soon unleashed a noxious backlash.  That afternoon, she was besieged by thousands of hateful messages. Users dug up a 2014 photograph of Ms. Xiao holding a poster that said ''Pray for Hong Kong'' and used it to accuse her of supporting Hong Kong independence. Hours after the photo surfaced, Ms. Xiao discovered her Weibo account had been frozen.  In a statement on April 13, Weibo said that four of the deleted accounts had posted ''illegal and harmful'' content, and it called on users to respect Weibo's basic principles, which include ''not inciting group confrontation and inciting a culture of boycott.'' In addition to Weibo, Ms. Xiao has had her account removed by one other Chinese internet company. None of the companies responded to requests for comment.  ''This has caused a lot of damage to my spirit,'' Ms. Xiao said in an interview. ''Since March 31, I have been very nervous, angry and depressed.''  Feminists in China say Weibo has applied a double standard when it comes to policing abuse against men and women. Weibo blocks the use of phrases such as ''national male,'' a derogatory term for Chinese men. But rape threats and words like ''bitch'' are permissible. Zheng Churan, a feminist whose account was also removed recently, said several of her female friends had tried to report offensive remarks to Weibo but had never succeeded.  ''It's really obvious where the platforms are aligned on such matters,'' Ms. Zheng said.  China's ruling Communist Party has long been wary of social activism that could challenge its rule and provoke instability. In 2015, the Chinese authorities detained Ms. Zheng and four other feminists on a charge of ''picking quarrels and provoking troubles'' ahead of a campaign about sexual harassment on public transportation. The detentions led to an international outcry.  Feminist ideas have slowly entered the mainstream. Many women have been encouraged by the small gains in the country's nascent #MeToo movement. And feminist thought appeals to Chinese women who feel that the government fails to address issues of gender discrimination, said Lu Pin, a veteran women's rights activist based in New York whose account was also removed.  There are few outlets for women to vent in China. ''That's why they go online,'' Ms. Lu said.  Weibo has played a central role in helping women find like-minded communities on the internet. It was on Weibo that women shared their thoughts on domestic violence, the difficulties of getting a divorce and gender discrimination in the workplace. Gender-related issues are often among the most talked-about subjects on the platform. But in a male-dominated culture, that has led to resentment.  Many of the most active opponents of China's rising online feminist discourse have hundreds of thousands of followers. Some are celebrated in state media and allied with a broader nationalist movement that sees any form of criticism as an affront to Beijing. Women are easy targets, facing death threats and accusations of being ''separatists.''  Douban, an internet forum and review website, has also recently removed at least eight groups dedicated to women's issues, according to China Digital Times, a website that tracks Chinese internet controls. Douban declined to comment.  After the hot pot incident, Taobao, an e-commerce site in China, removed 23 items from Ms. Xiao's online store, saying that they were ''prohibited content,'' according to a notice viewed by The new_york_times. All of the items had the word ''feminist'' written on them. Ms. Xiao sued Weibo in a Beijing court on April 14, seeking access to her account and $1,500 in compensation.  After she posted her lawsuit on WeChat, China's ubiquitous instant messaging platform, her public account was removed for ''violating regulations.''  Ms. Liang, the lawyer, said she was one of the many women inundated by abuse after she posted supportive messages for Ms. Xiao. She was furious when her Weibo account was frozen, because it meant she could no longer defend herself, she said. ''It's the equivalent of sealing your mouth shut, hanging you up and leaving you to burn,'' she said.  One of Ms. Liang's supposed offenses was sharing a post on Twitter by the group ''Chinese for Uyghurs.'' Her critics used it to accuse her of being unpatriotic by spreading awareness of the plight of the oppressed Muslim minority.  Despite the risks, many women continue to share messages of support for those who have been kicked off Weibo, Ms. Liang said. She described the platform as ''the only open space for me to speak out'' and said she wanted her account back, even though she knew that the same angry users would be waiting for her when she returned.  ''I think having this space is especially important for young women on the internet,'' she said. ''I refuse to give it up to those disgusting people.''  Elsie Chen contributed reporting. Lin Qiqing contributed research.  Elsie Chen contributed reporting. Lin Qiqing contributed research.  ''This has caused a lot of damage to my spirit,'' Xiao Meili, top, said after a noxious backlash on social media. Liang Xiaowen, above, a lawyer in New York, is suing Weibo for removing her account. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MEGHAN MARIN FOR THE new_york_times; XIAO MEILI)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00059 "
190		"    We Owe Fauci Gratitude, Not Grief  By Frank Bruni  1,491 words 25 April 2021   3     We owe him gratitude, not grief.  The phrases ''public servant'' and ''public service'' are exhausted to the point of meaninglessness. They're tics. They roll off politicians' tongues as readily as requests for money, suggesting that adulation and power aren't the more potent draws to elected office. They're invoked in regard to other government workers, as if decent paychecks and generous pensions weren't a significant lure.  But if anyone ever deserved to be described in those terms, it's Anthony Fauci. That was true before the coronavirus. It's truer now -- despite the times when he has revised his message on how to deal with it, despite assessments of the pandemic that didn't bear out and despite Republicans' efforts to use all of that to turn him into some bespectacled Beelzebub.  Shocker of shockers: Fauci isn't perfect. But he has been perfectly sincere, perfectly patient, a professional standing resolutely outside so many of the worst currents of American life. More than that, he has been essential. We owe him an immeasurable debt of gratitude, not the mind-boggling magnitude of grief that he gets.  If anything, that grief has grown more intense of late. It was on garish display during a House hearing just over a week ago, when Representative Jim Jordan, doing a fan dance for Fox News, tore into Fauci as a doomsday addict less intent on saving people's lives than on scrapping people's liberties.  ''Dr. Fauci, when is the time?'' Jordan, an Ohio Republican, asked, meaning the moment when we can all start behaving as if nobody's getting infected or dying anymore. (For the record, on a given day, more than 60,000 Americans are still testing positive for the coronavirus and an average of 700 lose their lives to Covid-19.) ''In your written statement, you say now is not the time to pull back on masking, physical distancing and avoiding congregate settings. When is the time? When do Americans get their freedom back?''  Jordan noted angrily that ''15 days of 'slow the spread' turned into one year of lost liberty.'' He made that sound like Fauci's fault, when the truth is that if more people, including Jordan and many of his constituents, had taken the ''slow the spread'' period more seriously, the year that followed it would probably have been much less brutal and significantly less deadly. But they were often too busy railing against Fauci to reform their own conduct.  Jordan isn't some grandstanding outlier. He's an emblem and instrument of widespread fury within his party, where the demonization of Fauci hasn't just survived Donald Trump's presidency but metastasized since its end.  ''Fauci'' was a dirty word uttered from the stage of the Conservative Political Action Conference in Florida in February. ''Fauci'' is a dirty word prevalent in conservative publications. In Breitbart News several days ago, Fauci was dismissively referred to as America's top ''public health celebrity.'' ''Fauci Fallacies at All-Time High'' was a recent headline in The Washington Free Beacon. In the span of one week this month, National Review published articles titled ''Anthony Fauci Has Worn Out His Welcome,'' ''Anthony Fauci's Misadventures in Fortune-Telling'' and ''Another Dismal Sunday-Show Circuit for Dr. Fauci.''  Just a few days ago in The Washington Post, Dan Diamond mentioned Fauci antipathy in the opening paragraph of a report about people who refuse to get vaccinations against the coronavirus. The message from one focus group of such people, he noted, was that ''if you're trying to win over skeptics, show us anyone besides Dr. Fauci.''  Philip Bump, one of Diamond's colleagues at The Post, correctly observed that ''Fauci has become what Trump always wanted him to be: the scapegoat for unpopular government recommendations.''  But it's even bigger and weirder than that. ''He doesn't work for us,'' the writer Naomi Wolf said on Fox News on Monday, referring to Fauci and reacting to a $1 million prize given to him by a philanthropy in Israel as a recognition of his, yes, public service. She cast the money as evidence that he was ''so conflicted'' and not sufficiently guided by concern for the ''public health of the American people.''  There's a lot of this out there, and all of it is out there. We live in times that are viciously partisan and oratorically sloppy -- but Fauci is neither.  He's consistently cool, answering the rants of Jordan and others with expert insights and logical analyses.  He's generally cautious, and the people constructing scorecards of his correct and incorrect predictions disingenuously conflate him with Oscar-pool contestants placing bets on best supporting actress. Fauci wasn't making wagers, wasn't saying sooths. He was giving his best educated guesses, based on what was knowable at that juncture. His guesses evolved as his -- and our -- education improved. Informed guidance like his is better than no guidance at all, and information isn't static.  Over three and a half decades as the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Fauci, now 80, has advised and earned the trust of Republican and Democratic presidents. He managed somehow to correct Trump and yet not be replaced with a sycophant who would have fed the former president's delusions and further endangered Americans' lives.  That's more than public service. That's magic. And he was thanked for it with death threats, issued not just to him but also to his family, and with a piece of mail that, when he opened it, sprayed an unidentified white powder all over him. He sat there covered in it while a hazardous materials team swept in.  ''My wife and my children were more disturbed than I was,'' he told The Times's Donald McNeil in an interview in January. ''I looked at it somewhat fatalistically. It had to be one of three things: A hoax. Or anthrax, which meant I'd have to go on Cipro for a month. Or if it was ricin, I was dead, so bye-bye.''  Why didn't he say bye-bye to this awful role and the nonstop vitriol, given how much he'd contributed to the country from the AIDS epidemic onward and given that most 80-year-olds like him are taking it just a tad easier?  ''I always felt that if I did walk away, the skunk at the picnic would no longer be at the picnic,'' he told McNeil, referring to his ability to challenge the happy talk of Trump administration officials who wanted simply to wish the coronavirus away. ''Even if I wasn't very effective in changing everybody's minds, the idea that they knew that nonsense could not be spouted without my pushing back on it, I felt was important. I think in the big picture, I felt it would be better for the country.''  He felt correctly. That assessment would be self-aggrandizing only if it weren't true, just as his many media interviews would smack of preening if there weren't such clear educational purpose to them. The key to his temperament -- and to the greater measure of humility than of hubris in it -- lies in how, even now, he talks about Trump. Although Fauci has ample cause for venom, there's little trace of it in his words. He faults Trump without mocking him. That shows a discipline that's rare. I never achieved it.  Sure, Fauci won a $1 million prize, but he didn't agitate for it, and there isn't a doubt in my mind that during many points over the years, he could have left government for the private sector, traded on his stature and connections, and become an exponentially wealthier man. He refrained from that as surely as he has from the pettiness that most of the rest of us can't resist.  ''He has no other ambition or agenda than the health of the country and world,'' wrote the Washington Post columnist Michael Gerson, who, as a senior official in the George W. Bush administration, became acquainted with Fauci.  I understand -- and personally feel -- any American's frustrations with the continued caveats regarding masks and gatherings and such. But it's Fauci's mandate to urge the safest possible behavior. I understand how maddening it can be to get different answers at different times. But uncertainty is the nature of this beast.  I don't understand the rage at a remarkable public servant, and I'll let Gerson have the last words on that. ''Fauci is practicing epidemiology,'' he wrote. ''His critics are practicing idiocy. Both are very good at their chosen work.''  I invite you to sign up for my free weekly email newsletter . You can follow me on Twitter ( @FrankBruni ).  (PHOTOGRAPH VIA WIKIMEDIA COMMONS)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00057 "
191		"    Chauvin Was Convicted, but Suffering Remains  By Elizabeth Bruenig  1,253 words 25 April 2021   3     What can be done about all of the suffering that remains?  After a wretched and withering year that didn't so much pass by as scorch through, the guilty verdict in Derek Chauvin's trial for the murder of George Floyd arrived as a relief. It's been a long time since it felt as though Americans had the luxury of thinking about the future we want to live in, as opposed to putting out fires in an endless present. In so many respects, we were due for a little hope.  And yet, amid all that, a dissonant note: Something is still very wrong.  On Instagram, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez lamented that ''this verdict is not justice. She added: ''Frankly, I don't even think we call it full accountability,'' echoing Senator Bernie Sanders on Twitter, where the lodestar of the left said that ''the jury's verdict delivers accountability for Derek Chauvin, but not justice for George Floyd.'' So many others -- activists, organizers, politicians -- shared similar thoughts. Something meaningful had occurred in the conviction of Mr. Chauvin, they agreed, but something incomplete, too.  In a sense, their unease with the outcome of Mr. Chauvin's trial echoes responses to the conviction of Harvey Weinstein, whose downfall incited the #MeToo movement. At the time, commenters pointed out that Mr. Weinstein's rape conviction was only ''a partial victory'' for the movement, ''less significant'' than it seemed. They were right -- not only because in Mr. Weinstein's case, as in Mr. Floyd's, the trial had become a metonym for a wider movement with unfinished business, but also because the things he had done, like the things Mr. Chauvin has done, could not be reversed.  It's a fact so obvious that it bears restating. Mr. Floyd is still dead, was still murdered, remains a person whose life ended abruptly and violently on a street in Minneapolis in broad daylight while bystanders looked on: None of that will ever change. Nor will Mr. Weinstein's victims receive in recompense the lives, the confidence, the dispositions they had before he violated them. The trouble is that no crime -- in fact, no harm -- is ever undone, and no loss affected by moral evil is ever entirely restored.  Agnes Callard, a philosopher at the University of Chicago, observed in a Boston Review forum last year that anger resulting from harm done likewise has no obvious terminus. ''Eventually we should move on, we are told, or let it go, or transmute our desire for revenge into a healthier or more respectable feeling,'' Ms. Callard wrote. But when do we let go, when do we know it's time to move on, and what does that mean when emotions -- which should not be dismissed as irrelevant to politics -- are in play? Or can these feelings issuing from echoing loss be transmuted -- and if so, into what, by whom? How do we ever know when it's time to stop seeking restoration for harm, and do we stop because it's the right thing to do, or because after a point it's no use searching for, longing for things that aren't going to come?  One tragedy of the criminal justice system is that it ought to provide answers to some of those questions. Because eternal retribution all but guarantees perpetual conflict, we have agreed, as a society, that an impartial and (aspirationally) fair system will generate and enforce consequences that exhaust claims to retribution, and close these matters as they arise. That the system is infamously prone to bias and capriciousness undermines its capacity to serve its critical purpose.  But even if it were entirely successful, its punishments would still be arbitrarily chosen (why 10 years for manslaughter, rather than 11 or nine?) and restoration would still be beyond its powers. Still: Despite its deficiencies, we allow it to tell us when a case is closed. It's all we can do. But what can be done with the harm that these recent reckonings have revealed -- not on behalf of institutions or ideologies, but between individual people in daily life?  One consequence of the justice movements of the last several years is that we see things differently now. Difficult interactions appear in a new, unflattering light. We pause to consider the meaning of slights we may have ignored before: Is this (''No wonder they hired you! Look at you!'') a form of that (sexism), one might wonder, just in miniature? The answer is bound to be yes at least sometimes, and most likely often.  As we emerge from a string of calamities with the benefit of what we've learned, a question worth considering is what we can do about the fact of these interpersonal damages, the sort -- a rude remark, a thoughtless comment in company, a revealing gesture -- that can't be adjudicated in court but aren't meaningless, either; the kind we simply want never to have happened, and short of that, not to happen again. What can be done about all of that suffering?  In one sense, the answer is nothing. Pain lasts, grief lasts, anger lasts. The life you had before loss is never returned to you. There's a hole in the world, one of the many regrettable results of our human tendency to hurt one another. I look inside myself, where all of those emotions bored holes through my soul. What did I do, when did it stop? In some cases, those feelings ran through the channels they carved in me until they flowed into other reservoirs: the stock of sentiments that drive and inform the work that I do, the stories I choose to tell, the subjects I try to understand. In others, time made me a stranger to the person who was once so wounded. But in others still, I know the feelings were simply pushed away ''like a skiff at the shore,'' as a poet once put it, ''no longer useful.''  Forgiveness doesn't feel particularly triumphant. It's a gift no one wants to be in the position to give; it releases a wrongdoer from moral debt -- for their own good and the common good, not for the sake of the wronged. And it provides a place for those emotions that circle, vulturelike, around one's thoughts to finally come to rest, no longer nourished by attention. It's a strange and wanting gift for a strange and wanting world, and I would never admonish anyone for declining to extend it. God knows, I've failed in the practice as often as I've succeeded.  But I want to live in a world where it is possible to forgive and to be forgiven. In fact, I think it's necessary. And I think it emerges not from a place of moral victory, but from the realization of human brokenness, the recognition of things lost that can't be regained, and the emptiness that holds their place. It's from these gaps that beautiful things sometimes grow.  Elizabeth Bruenig (@ebruenig) is an Opinion writer.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY CALLAGHAN O'HARE/REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00056 "
192		"    The Harsh Reality Behind 'Nomadland'  By Jessica Bruder  1,064 words 25 April 2021   2     People who live in homes-on-wheels should not have to be in constant fear of ''the knock.''  Spending the first night in my 1995 GMC camper van, I lay awake for hours in my sleeping bag, watching the window shades glow -- white, then red, over and over -- as cars sped past in the dark. Is that one slowing down? I wondered. Can they see I'm in here? Will they call the cops?  Van dwellers had told me about ''the knock'' -- usually three sharp raps at the door, often by the police. The risk of getting jolted awake and kicked off my patch of asphalt kept me uneasy and made it hard to sleep.  I was living in a van as a journalist, as research for my book ''Nomadland.'' Over the course of three years, I followed Americans who had been squeezed out of traditional housing and moved into vans, late-model RVs, even a few sedans. I drove more than 15,000 miles -- from coast to coast, from Mexico to the Canadian border. And night after night, I bedded down in a new place, whether a truck stop or the Sonoran Desert. Sometimes I stayed on city streets or in suburban parking lots, which rattled me in ways I'd never expected.  For people whose only home is a vehicle, the knock is a visceral, even existential, threat. How do you avoid it? You hide in plain sight. Make yourself invisible. Internalize the idea that you're unwelcome. Stay hypervigilant to avoid trouble. Apart from telling you to clear out, the police can harass you with fines and tickets or get your home-on-wheels towed away to an impound lot.  I think about ''the knock'' a lot these days. More people are moving into vehicles as shelters of last resort, and their ranks are likely to swell when Covid-19 eviction bans expire. Laws punishing the unhoused population have been appearing around the country in a wave of NIMBYism.  We are emerging from what may be the most introspective year in American history. The meditative film based on my book, which is up for six Oscars this weekend, fits that mood well. The pandemic has prompted much talk of interconnectedness and empathy, what we owe one another as a society. ''Nomadland'' reminds us that our bonds should extend to those who live in homes-on-wheels. No one should have to live in constant fear of the knock.  In the film, Fern, played by Frances McDormand, is startled by a knock that interrupts a quiet meal. She looks up with a start and swears. A face hovers at the window, and a fist pounds once, twice, three times on the door. Then comes a gruff voice. ''No overnight parking! You can't sleep here.''  Watching the character's panic at the sudden sound of a fist hitting her van gave me anxious flashbacks. Then it made me sad. Then I felt angry, because that scene was just too accurate, and I wished it didn't reflect the reality of how people treat one another.  Some of the nomads from my book play versions of themselves in the film. They know this phenomenon too well. Swankie, 76, told me she had nightmares about it while sleeping in her 2006 Chevy Express van.  ''I have this strange, surreal dream of someone knocking,'' she explained. ''Usually happens if I am not 100 percent comfortable with where I am parking.''  Bob Wells, 65, has a popular video, ''Avoiding the Knock,'' and has been lecturing on the topic for ages. I first heard him talk about it seven years ago in the Sonoran Desert, at a gathering called the Rubber Tramp Rendezvous. He shared tactics for ''stealth parking,'' such as creating police-friendly alibis and making your van look like a contractor's work vehicle.  At first listen, I thought about how clever and resourceful those strategies were. But after hearing them a few times, I reached a second conclusion: In a better world, people wouldn't have to go to such lengths to stay out of sight.  The nonprofit National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty keeps tabs on over 180 urban and rural cities across America, more than half of which have enacted laws that make it hard or nearly impossible to live in vehicles.  Over the past decade, Tristia Bauman, an attorney at the center, has seen the regulations multiply. Some places forbid overnight parking. Others outlaw inhabiting a vehicle outright. Penalties can pile up fast. Unpaid, they lead to the cruelest punishment of all: towing. Failing to pay an impound fee means losing not just a car but a home.  What would a surge of pandemic-related evictions mean for this community? ''We are very concerned -- bordering on terrified -- about what the future might hold,'' Ms. Bauman said.  There are a few bright spots. Some towns have created areas where vehicle dwellers can sleep undisturbed, modeled after the Safe Parking Program that began in 2004 in Santa Barbara, Calif. But those places are few and far between.  More often ''the knock'' is the law of the land. In the run-up to the Oscars, some have asked what viewers might take away from the film. Letting vehicle dwellers exist in peace would be a fine start. Individuals have the power to help. When you see someone living in a car, van or RV, don't call the police.  If you've seen the movie, remember how the knock made Fern cringe, her voice tightening with anxiety and exhaustion as she shouted, ''I'm leaving!''  Then envision a kinder scene, in which people can eat or sleep in peace -- even if their homes are on wheels.  Jessica Bruder is the author of ''Nomadland: Surviving America in the Twenty-First Century'' and an adjunct professor at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Adria Malcolm for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00055 "
193		"   LETTERS  Should the U.S. Exit Afghanistan?  1,371 words 25 April 2021   6     Three Times columnists offered varying views on the withdrawal of troops, and our readers do likewise.  To the Editor:  Re ''Biden Ditches the Generals, Finally,'' by Maureen Dowd (column, April 18):  President Biden's decision to remove the remaining American troops from Afghanistan is necessary and right, but tragic nonetheless. It's necessary and right because the war is unwinnable at any level of troop strength.  We may mourn the tragedy that will unfold when the Taliban again seize power, but should it be Americans' job to avert that eventuality indefinitely? I for one am not about to volunteer for that mission, and I don't feel that the brave women and men of our armed forces should be forced to either.  It's tragic for many reasons, not least because there are many wonderful people in Kabul who will be the target of a Taliban blood bath and a return to Taliban barbarism. We can expect that women will again lose all rights and be forbidden to work, and that schools for girls will be closed. To mitigate this disaster, President Biden should immediately establish a sizable quota for Afghan refugees and asylum seekers.  Ed Gogol  Crystal Lake, Ill.  To the Editor:  While I largely agree with Maureen Dowd's analysis, she leaves something out that is absolutely key to understanding NATO's failures in Afghanistan: President George W. Bush's decision to turn from finishing the job there to invading Iraq.  As a member of the Task Force on Terrorism Finance, I remember quite vividly how the dedicated civil servants in the U.S. Treasury were forced to pivot from building an effective strategy for combating terrorism financing to preparing for the Iraq invasion. I also remember the radical change in attitude toward the United States by staff from virtually every country: from strong support to actual disdain.  It isn't only that the Afghan invasion would have turned out quite differently had the over 150,000 service people sent to invade and occupy Iraq been instead sent to Afghanistan. Resources spent on Iraq could have been mobilized against terror financing, including stopping financial support heading to the Taliban.  Richard K. Gordon  Bethany, Conn.  The writer, former senior counsel at the International Monetary Fund, is a professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Law.  To the Editor:  Re ''Abandoning Afghanistan Is a Huge Error,'' by Bret Stephens (column, April 20):  Perhaps Mr. Stephens should ask service members who did up to five tours in Afghanistan what they think of President Biden's decision to finally leave a war with no end in sight and no military solution.  Twenty years is not cutting and running. Bringing the troops home from yet another deadly quagmire is not without risks, but they pale compared with the prospect of permanent war in a place where no victory is possible.  Robin R. Meyers  Oklahoma City  The writer is a retired minister.  To the Editor:  Bret Stephens makes an eloquent case for a misguided notion that has sunk the United States into multiple foreign policy quagmires: that U.S. behavior in one part of the world will serve as a useful signal to allies and enemies about what the U.S. will do elsewhere.  Mr. Stephens is right to point out that U.S. withdrawal will likely have tragic consequences for many Afghans, which should not be minimized. It is absurd, however, to think that either Moscow or Beijing are taking cues from whether the United States stands up to the Taliban, when both have richly benefited from the U.S. being bogged down in its forever wars.  Mr. Stephens asks whether Ukrainians and Taiwanese will ''find comfort'' in the Afghanistan withdrawal. My bet is that they will. Over the last two decades, nothing has more threatened the credibility of U.S. deterrence in Eastern Europe and East Asia than being tied down in Afghanistan and Iraq.  Deterrence theorists would tell Mr. Stephens that overcommitment jeopardizes credibility just as much as underdelivery.  Andi Zhou  Berkeley, Calif.  To the Editor:  There's an unexamined aspect of the Biden administration's decision in Bret Stephens's analysis: To what degree does the continued presence of American soldiers actually perpetuate the deterioration of the Afghan government's position? Could it have anything to do with the Afghans' long history of strong aversion to foreigners within their country?  Why is government support among the Afghan people declining? How is it that after decades of conflict the Taliban continue to attract fighters? You can argue from the safety of the United States that their choice is a terrible one, especially for women, but it is their choice. Recognize that. Leave now.  Bill Lindenfelser  Rochester, N.Y.  To the Editor:  Re ''I Was With Biden in Kabul in 2002,'' by Thomas L. Friedman (column, April 21):  Mr. Friedman's conclusion that ''our nation's effort there was worth a try'' is contradicted by historical fact. Our invasion following the 9/11 attacks was sold by the administration as an effort to apprehend or kill the perpetrators. The real effort, however, became one of nation building, importing a Jeffersonian democracy at the point of a gun.  This was a public failure 40 years earlier in Vietnam, a failure analyzed and documented at every level of our government and society at large. Our Afghanistan effort never had a chance at success and was clearly never worth a try.  Eric R. Carey  Arlington, Va.  To the Editor:  Like Thomas L. Friedman, ''I wonder if we have become more like the Afghans and not the Afghans more like us.''  I have little doubt that Vladimir Putin's Russia will take advantage of the vacuum our leaving creates, just as it has been taking advantage of our divisiveness.  I feel for those young Afghans whom Mr. Friedman met 20 years ago, filled with so much hope and determination. Where are they now? And I wonder about us then. As we looked for a foundation upon which to build greater stability, could we have ever found it while looking to build a nation in our image, not theirs? I wonder where those young Afghans full of hope would have looked, and if they told us, whether we would have listened.  And what if we had only ventured into Afghanistan, where we had reason to be, and not into Iraq, where we had no business going? Might that have changed the odds of our success?  Diana M. Smith  Weston, Mass.  The writer is the founder of the Actionsmith Network, which promotes societal renewal.  To the Editor:  Although we went to war in Afghanistan, we are not at war. We are bolstering the law enforcement of a democracy; we are essentially an auxiliary police.  Wars end; criminal activities never do, and we shouldn't expect them to. We do not wring our hands in frustration that the United States still has crime; our police forces can only limit it, not eliminate it.  The ongoing cost of policing the Taliban is piddling compared with the costs in national security that will accrue from a hostile Taliban-ruled nation.  And that's not even factoring in the human cost -- the civilians who will be tortured and killed if the Taliban effect regime change. We jump-started a democracy in a hostile landscape; why ignore our success? And why toss it away simply because bad actors persist?  Alice Leiner  Seattle  To the Editor:  I believe the fact that we had a military draft during the Vietnam War contributed to the timing of our exit from that conflict. Almost every American family had or could have had skin in that game, and thus a never-ending bloody stalemate became inconceivable. I wonder if our Afghanistan quagmire would have gone on for so long if instead of a military made up of volunteers, any son (or daughter) had faced being drafted to risk their life or limb ''nation-building'' in Afghanistan or Iraq.  Fred L. Feldman  Marblehead, Mass.  American military personnel aboard a plane from Helmand Province to Kabul, Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jim Huylebroek for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00053 "
194		"    Crushed Dream Factory  By Maureen Dowd  978 words 25 April 2021   7     WASHINGTON -- People are talking about the Oscars this year.  Namely, how they won't be watching. A lot of people don't even realize the show, once an edge-of-your-seat American institution, is Sunday.  Movie stars don't exist anymore. Movies have been swallowed by TV and streaming. The theaters are on life support; even the ArcLight on Sunset Boulevard, one of the most beloved movie palaces in a town full of cinephiles, could not be saved.  Norma Desmond's everlasting declaration -- ''It's the pictures that got small!'' -- has never seemed more true.  Sex, glamour, excitement and mystery are relics of a bygone era. Hollywood is now focused on worthy, relevant, socially conscious and lugubrious.  As a Hollywood writer friend of mine said after she watched ''Nomadland'': ''That was not entertainment. That was Frances McDormand having explosive diarrhea in a plastic bucket on a van.''  Not a crop of movies that make you reach for the Junior Mints.  In this grim Oscar season, it's pathetic that the show's producers had to issue a memorandum to participants reminding them to dress up. No pajamas or sweatshirts, please.  ''They're over -- who cares about the Oscars?'' said André Leon Talley, the author of ''The Chiffon Trenches.''  Steven Soderbergh, one of the producers of the show, which will be split between the Dolby Theatre and Union Station, defended the decision to curb Zooming, telling The Los Angeles Times, ''It's not a webinar.''  Brooks Barnes, a Hollywood reporter for The new_york_times, put it this way: ''The Oscars forgot about its primary job -- to sell Hollywood to the world, to be a big, fat commercial for the dream factory, the kind that makes financiers open their wallets and wannabe actresses get pinwheels in their eyes about the day they might be able to stand on that stage and give their acceptance speech.''  Soderbergh is trying to reset and drag the show back to the days when it wasn't a drag, but it may be too late.  Surveys show that small percentages of people who watch movies have seen, or even heard of, the nominated films. (A whopping 15 percent are even aware of what the hell a ''Mank'' is.)  There's a lot of change in Hollywood that's thrilling, as content and talent finally start to reflect what the country looks like, and lives like, stories not decided on by the fetid pool of replicant white guys.  This year, nine of the 20 acting nominations went to people of color. Two women were nominated for best director, and Chloé Zhao is a favorite to win for ''Nomadland,'' which would make her only the second female winner in the ceremony's 93 years.  But you still need rapt audiences. What Hollywood is forgetting, to its own peril, is that it's show business, and it needs to find a way to marry its past storytelling chops with the exciting new forces of its future.  Bill Maher made the point on his show that we could use more escapism in this year of plague and tumult.  ''I don't have to leave the theater whistling, but would it kill you once in a while to make a movie that doesn't make me want to take a bath with the toaster?'' he said, adding: ''Academy nominations used to say, 'Look what great movies we make.' Now they say, 'Look what good people we are.' It's not about entertainment, it's about suffering, specifically yours.''  Leon Wieseltier, the editor of the literary journal Liberties, agrees that Hollywood has ''traded playfulness and complexity and surprise and depth for virtue.''  Ron Brownstein, who wrote the entertaining new book ''Rock Me on the Water,'' has a more sanguine view. He believes the current turmoil in our culture echoes the early 1970s, which resulted in a golden age for Hollywood, with classics like ''Nashville,'' ''Chinatown'' and ''Five Easy Pieces.''  There were movies by the likes of Robert Altman and Arthur Penn that swirled with ideas emerging from stormy social movements.  Later in the decade, there was a backlash from younger directors like George Lucas and Steven Spielberg who were less interested in critiquing the culture than in entertaining the public; they wanted audiences to cheer at heroes and hiss at villains -- or sharks.  ''Their goal was to thrill and exhilarate, not tear down the myths that Hollywood had created,'' Brownstein said.  Lucas said in a speech at the time he made ''American Graffiti'' that he did it because ''I decided it was time to make a movie where people felt better coming out of the theater than when they went in. It had become depressing to go to the movies.''  With streaming, Brownstein said, filmmakers can do more personal stories because the movies don't have to be tent poles with explosions and special effects, and they ''don't have to make $400 million to turn a profit.'' But those stories are often less universal, more narrowcast.  Brownstein sees the same tension now, as back then, between filmmakers offering critical portrayals of the country and people who think it's a downer.  ''The dominant impulse of filmmakers now,'' he concluded, ''is to show you stories and truths that Hollywood has obscured.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  The trailer for the forthcoming ''Black Widow'' movie running to an empty house at the Alpine Cinema in Brooklyn. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Devin Oktar Yalkin for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00052 "
195		"    Keep Covid at Bay: That's Show Biz  By Chloe Malle  2,931 words 25 April 2021   1     They're at the Oscars, on film sets, at festivals and office buildings. Meet the new gatekeepers to gathering responsibly.  Dr. Linda Dahl was pacing the alleyway off a sound stage at Kaufman Astoria Studios in Long Island City. It was 7 a.m. on a gray April morning, and Dr. Dahl, an ear, nose and throat surgeon turned Covid compliance officer, was overseeing testing for the nearly 300-person cast and crew of a TV production. Already it had been a long day.  At 5 a.m., someone's PCR test from the day before had come back positive, which meant that Dr. Dahl spent the next two hours contact tracing and isolating crew members who had been in contact with the infected person. ''You're getting a little excitement today,'' she said.  At Sunday's Academy Awards, the team is hoping for low excitement. Dr. Erin Bromage, the lead Covid compliance consultant for the Oscars, has overseen on-set compliance for more than 35 productions since last June, beginning with Joel Coen's ''The Tragedy of Macbeth.''  But awards shows are different, said Dr. Bromage, who is also a professor of immunology and infectious diseases at UMass Dartmouth. ''With TV and film, you've got time to get it right,'' he said. ''With the Academy Awards, it's live. There's no learning on the go, and there is no second time around.''  The show will take place at Union Station in downtown Los Angeles and will be produced by Steven Soderbergh, Stacey Sher and Jesse Collins. Mr. Soderbergh, the director of the 2011 movie ''Contagion,'' and Ms. Sher, one of its producers, consulted many of the same epidemiologists they did then to help safeguard the awards ceremony.  Mr. Soderbergh has said that the awards will celebrate the way the entertainment industry has paved the way for others to open up again -- though in March he called the logistics ''mind-numbing'' and described the show's plans as ''etched in Jell-O.''  ''This is the biggest global production that's out there,'' Dr. Bromage said, noting that people will be traveling from all over the world. (Quarantine will be shorter if you traveled in a ''low-risk manner,'' such as in first or business class, and if you are vaccinated.) Guests and presenters will be sent at-home testing kits, and most people will receive day-of PCRs for a test total of around 15,000. Ms. Sher said she hopes the show will provide ''a glimpse of what is going to be possible when most people are vaccinated and rapid testing is the norm.''  'A Hammer and a Scalpel'  Compliance practices at the Oscars will be closely watched as organizers prepare for the gradual resumption of major events such as, say, the next Tonys (to be coordinated with Broadway's reopening).  Dr. Dahl remembers such extravaganzas well; a theater fan, her ENT practice was a hub for Broadway stars such as Neil Patrick Harris and Darren Criss. With the majority of her patients performers, she burned through her savings to cover the rent on her Midtown office and finally closed her practice in June of 2020.  She said she applied to volunteer at three New York hospitals during the city's pandemic peak but did not hear back. Instead, she sold a proposal for a book on breastfeeding, ''Suck It,'' and painted her bedroom aqua fresco. In August, the wife of a former patient, a TV line manager, called looking for something called a Covid compliance officer.  ''Nobody had heard of that name before,'' Dr. Dahl said. ''They were just coming up with what that meant.'' When the line producer described what was needed for the role, Dr. Dahl told her: ''It sounds like someone who doesn't exist. It's like hiring a unicorn. You need someone who is an epidemiologist, but who also knows production and who can oversee health and safety and the logistics that entails.''  Part cop, part coach, C.C.O.s have become essential overseers in America's tentative return to prepandemic life. ''We're at a tipping point,'' said Dr. Blythe Adamson, an infectious disease epidemiologist and economist. ''People are going out more, they have pandemic fatigue. They're vaccinated, but people are still getting Covid with these new strains. It makes the compliance officer role extremely important.''  ''It's the difference between a hammer and a scalpel,'' said Dr. Adamson, who has been consulting with companies and organizations to help create reopening protocols for live events. ''Covid compliance last April was just 'stay home.' Now, a year later, we've figured out a way to do more things but there are more nuances to how to do them safely. It's much harder to be the C.C.O. with the scalpel. Things can be really risky if we don't have all the right layers added up.''  ''Everyone I'm talking to is saying, 'The wave is coming, as soon as we can work out these kinks we're back,''' said Grace Richardson, an on-set compliance coordinator who is also on the Covid team for NY Pops Up, a performance festival. ''Film and TV has paved the way for all of this to happen, L.A. tried it first over the summer, then New York in the fall, I think their production protocols will set the blueprint for every other event.''  Ms. Richardson worked as a production manager for luxury fashion events such as Rihanna's Savage x Fenty fashion show and Chanel's J12 Yacht Club event. After being laid off by her agency in July a production assistant friend in her book club told her about her new C.C.O. role. ''I thought, 'If I can check in people for the Met Gala, I can check in people for Covid,''' Ms. Richardson said. It is -- and isn't -- that simple.  Bursting the 'Spit Bubbles'  Covid compliance officers come to the job with a range of skill sets. For instance: Stephanie Wolf, a production assistant turned C.C.O., was on the cleaning team for the 2020 Emmy Awards, where she wiped down doorknobs and railings every hour with Spic and Span antibacterial wipes. Then there's Dr. Dahl reading PCR test results at 4 a.m.  The webinars offered range from two to 40 hours. In a two-hour Health Education Services course, one of the leading C.C.O. certifications, students learn how to build a pandemic ''kit'' (including a tape measure for social distancing) and that the virus enters the body through the eyes, mouth and nose. C.C.O.s tend to come from the entertainment industry and event production rather than the medical field, which can sow doubt and confusion when C.D.C. and OSHA guidelines changes or seems to contradict each other.  Mark Liu, a longtime production coordinator turned C.C.O. who oversaw all testing for the 2020 Emmys, took a basic health training course online. ''That doesn't tell you how to execute and implement,'' he said. ''Every production is its own beast. There's no blue book of 'here's what you should do.'''  Mr. Liu has since shifted out of on-set production completely, preferring to spend his days doing accounting from his bungalow in the San Gabriel Valley with his tabby cat, Kit. ''Covid broke my brain a bit,'' he said. ''Other people can feel free to carry that torch.''  In March, Dr. Adamson joined the White House Task Force, working 20 hour days as a math modeler on the ventilator shortage after flying her 9- and 11-year-old daughters out to stay with her parents on their oyster farm in the Pacific Northwest. ''Someone gets tasked with this job and they read all the C.D.C. guidance and translate it to their setting and come up with a protocol, but they're not coming from a medical background,'' she said. Since the summer, she has served on a number of advisory boards to help industries and organizations return to operating, including Broadway and the N.B.A. (She helped conceive the bubble model.)  Dr. Adamson met some resistance when she recommended allocating a $30,000 budget to upgrade the filtration and HVAC ventilation at a Broadway theater rather than hiring staff to provide temperature checks at the door and constant cleaning of surfaces. ''Choice A gives the appearance of doing the right things,'' she said, referring to the door checkers and wipe-downs. ''Choice B is actually going to mitigate risk.''  Dr. Dahl said she is regularly frustrated with the ''Covid theater'' of certain studio- or union-mandated protocols, including rapid tests, temperature screenings, and plastic dividers in the makeup and catering department, which she describes as potential ''spit bubbles.'' She insists the most important aspects of keeping a production safe are consistent PCR testing and ventilation.  She also finds the hypocrisy of crew compliance frustrating. Dr. Dahl will watch crew members follow her rules all day, then jump in a car together maskless after work. But this frustration runs the other direction as well: Chad Connell, an actor filming a romantic comedy outside Toronto, noted the absurdity of being chastised by one compliance officer for chatting with his co-star maskless after they completed a kissing scene.  Dr. Dahl's first compliance job was on a $100 million production last August, the third show to begin filming in New York State. She had never been on a film set before. ''It was terrifying. Otherworldly,'' she said, noting that the sci-fi sets also contributed to the feeling of disorientation. ''It was a completely different language.'' She learned the words ''grip'' and ''gaffer,'' and that a ''strike'' was about breaking down a set not a picket line.  ''I was this random woman named Linda, showing up with a bullhorn,'' said Dr. Dahl, who had been accustomed to wearing five-inch Stuart Weitzman heels and Diane von Furstenberg cocktail dresses to her office and was now in Merrell waterproof boots and Joie cargo pants.  ''I had complete control. I could shut the show down, but also it was up to me to lead them through this safely,'' she said. ''It's a huge responsibility and I'm a stranger to them who has never worked in this world.'' The crew didn't know what to call her. She told them to call her ''Linda,'' but they insisted on calling her ''Dr. Linda.''  ''I think they needed to call me 'doctor' to have faith in me, for me to command some authority,'' she said.  Dogs, Scanners, Action  The budget for Covid compliance on sets is high: 25 to 30 percent of the total, according to Dr. Dahl and others. Dr. Dahl said she now makes in a week what she used to make in a day in private practice. She oversees a team of 18, mostly coming from the theater world, but has worked with C.C.O.s with backgrounds as varied as the U.S. Army and insurance.  Of course, what constitutes Covid compliance can change on a weekly, even daily, basis with C.D.C. guidelines ever evolving. ''It's a roller coaster,'' said Alexandra Williams, the director of event services for the Greek Theater in Los Angeles. ''Things are happening so fast right now.''  Ms. Williams noted the boom of compliance and Covid safety related companies marketing everything from testing to sanitation to industrial thermometers. ''Everyone is trying to sell you something that will keep your work space safe, it's hard to know what to do. How do we know in three months this will be obsolete?'' She has been pitched Covid sniffing dogs and six-figure thermal scanners. ''There are already so many logistical pawns in producing events and now that is double.'' As she spoke to a reporter, she was staring at a registration grid for The Greek Theater's first large event, an E-gaming conference ''It's not for the faint of heart.''  Connor Fitzpatrick, executive director of CrowdRx, which provides safety and medical support for large gatherings, said, ''We always offer a caveat: 'Our guidance today is not the same as our guidance tomorrow.''' His company has been getting calls daily for help planning Covid-safe events this summer, from large-scale music festivals such as the upcoming Global Citizen Vaxx Live Concert to 10-person family reunions, Mr. Fitzpatrick admits the constantly changing guidelines from health organizations provides a challenge.  CrowdRx heavily relied on thermal scanning before doubts were raised about temperatures being a reliable indicator of infection. ''I like to describe it as the Swiss cheese model: As long as the holes don't line up, each piece of protocol and protection is stopping a percentage of opportunity for infection,'' Mr. Fitzpatrick said. (He used to be most concerned about rattlesnake bites and hyperthermia at festivals such as Burning Man.)  Pope Jackson is the production manager at the Shed, the multidisciplinary arts venue at Hudson Yards, and has become the Covid commander for the institution after receiving two compliance certifications. He says meeting the separate list of protocols set by each union is the most logistically challenging part of the job. For example, the American Federation of Musicians union requires brown paper bags to be provided for vocalists and wind instrumentalists to stash their masks while performing. ''You need to have that or the whole show could be thrown off,'' said Mr. Jackson, who successfully oversaw the New York Philharmonic's first show in 400 days in the Shed's McCourt Theater in mid-April.  But with everyone considering themselves Covid experts and guidelines ever-shifting compliance fatigue can be high. Dr. Dahl said she is often yelled at on set. ''I've had random crew scream at me, everything from 'That's not the science' to both 'You're not strict enough' and 'You're too strict.'''  She and other C.C.O.s say they're often referred to as the ''Covid Cop,'' both affectionately and not. An extra on a Disney show said the crew referred to that C.C.O. as the ''pool noodle Nazi'' for the foam pool accessory repurposed to prod extras into six feet of social distance.  ''There's a nice way to do it,'' said Bronson van Wyck, the event planner, of compliance policing. He says instead of reminding someone to put on a mask he would offer someone a fresh one from a silver bowl. ''The same way I would say, 'We're about to serve dinner,' instead of 'You should have gone into the dining room 30 minutes ago, the food is cold.'''  For many in the hospitality business, assuming the role of party cop has been counterintuitive. For others, however, it has prepared them well for Covid management. Mariellynn Maurer has run the College of William & Mary's Events and Conferences Department for almost two decades but was repositioned last summer to oversee Richmond Hall, the dormitory that acted as the isolation area for students who had tested positive. The school newspaper, The Flat Hat, dubbed her the ''Quarantine Queen.''  ''We're hosting 'guests,' just in a bit of a different situation,'' said Ms. Maurer, who organized virtual movie nights for quarantining students with boxed fresh made popcorn delivered to each door, a perk plucked from past summer conferences, and one way to make it easier to force college students to stay in a dorm room for ten days.  Back at Kaufman Astoria Studios, a crew member walked by carrying a large sheet cake for the key grip's birthday. Dr. Dahl's precisely plucked eyebrows rose. ''They can't eat that in there,'' she said wistfully, but without remorse. They also cannot blow out candles and she will encourage clapping rather than singing. ''I try to be really polite and nice about reminders, I'll try to use humor and make a joke of it,'' Dr. Dahl said. ''But it's hard to be the nag.''  But the nagging will persist for the foreseeable future, according to Dr. Adamson. ''A C.C.O. position will continue for several years,'' she said, depending on the prevalence in the community, ''There will still be variants circulating two years from now.''  ''I would be happy to not have a Covid career,'' Dr. Dahl said. ''It's a bummer.'' She says she jokes that people have had to pivot, ''and I pivoted into a cul-de-sac.'' Though her film set exposure has reignited a dormant screenwriting hobby. In addition to an ongoing project about her father, a Syrian immigrant to North Dakota who was a ''low-level C.I.A. spy,'' the other is percolating in real time.  ''I think it would be hilarious to do a series like 'The Office' but based on being a Covid compliance officer,'' she said. ''I mean, it writes itself.''  Dr. Linda Dahl, a Covid compliance officer, at the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE new_york_times) (ST1); The polished interior of Union Station in Los Angeles, where part of this year's Oscars will take place. Guests and presenters will receive Covid-19 tests. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS PIZZELLO/INVISION, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (ST8-ST9); Last year, Dr. Linda Dahl, an ear, nose and throat surgeon, became a Covid compliance officer for TV and film productions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE new_york_times) (ST9)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00050 "
196		"    The Arms Dealer in the Crosshairs of Russia's Elite Assassination Squad  By Michael Schwirtz  1,503 words 25 April 2021   16     Russian spies have twice tried to poison Emilian Gebrev. Now, revelations in the Czech Republic show they also destroyed shipments of his military supplies.  For a major arms merchant, Emilian Gebrev cuts the modest figure of a bemused grandfather, preferring soccer jerseys and polo shirts to suits and ties, driving his own car and insisting that he is of little importance outside his native Bulgaria.  But this week it became clear just how significant Mr. Gebrev is, at least to an elite squad of Russian operatives within the Kremlin's military intelligence service.  Days after the Czech authorities accused the assassination team, known as Unit 29155, of being behind a series of 2014 explosions at weapons depots that killed two people, Mr. Gebrev acknowledged that his supplies were stored at the depots. And according to Czech officials, Mr. Gebrev's stocks were the target.  The revelation is a new and startling development, given that the authorities say the group also twice tried to kill Mr. Gebrev. In 2015, the Bulgarian authorities say that officers with the unit traveled to Bulgaria and poisoned him with a substance resembling the same Novichok nerve agent used against former spies and obstinate critics of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. After the first attempt failed to kill him, they returned and poisoned him again.  There has always been an uncertainty about why the Russians were so determined to get Mr. Gebrev. Now the Czech case adds further evidence that the Kremlin was after him because of his business dealings.  In an email to The new_york_times, Mr. Gebrev acknowledged that he was storing ammunition at the Czech arms depot and admitted something that he had long denied: that his company, Emco, had shipped military equipment to Ukraine after 2014, when separatists backed by the Russian military and intelligence services started a war with Ukrainian forces.  The Russian team's involvement in the explosions in the Czech Republic add to a growing list of operations attributed to Unit 29155, and have further inflamed an intensifying standoff between Russia and the West.  On Thursday, the Czech government said it would expel as many as 60 Russian diplomats on top of the 18 it had already kicked out of the country in response to the explosions, potentially dismantling Russia's diplomatic presence in the country. Russia has vowed to respond accordingly, and has already expelled 20 officials from the Czech Embassy in Moscow.  The tit for tat came just days after the United States announced that it would expel 10 Russian diplomats and impose sanctions as punishment for a huge breach of U.S. government computers systems that the White House blamed on Russia's foreign intelligence agency. It also coincided with Russia massing troops on the Ukraine border, only to partly pull back this week.  For years, Unit 29155 operated in Europe before Western intelligence agencies even discovered it. A 2019 investigation by The new_york_times revealed the purpose of the unit and showed that its officers had carried out the attempted assassination a year earlier of a former Russian spy named Sergei V. Skripal, who was poisoned in Salisbury, England.  Numerous other examples of the unit's handiwork have since been exposed. Last year, the Times revealed a C.I.A. assessment that officers from the unit may have carried out a secret operation to pay bounties to a network of criminal militants in Afghanistan in exchange for attacks on U.S. and coalition troops.  Bulgarian prosecutors charged three officers from Unit 29155 with poisoning Mr. Gebrev in January 2020 and issued warrants for their arrest. They also released surveillance video of one of the assailants apparently smearing poison on the door handles of cars belonging to Mr. Gebrev, his son and a senior manager in a garage near their offices in Sofia, the Bulgarian capital.  But Mr. Gebrev questions whether the unit acted alone, suggesting that even if Russian assassins were responsible for his poisoning, they were likely in cahoots with his enemies in Bulgaria.  In the summer and fall of 2019, I met with Mr. Gebrev several times and even toured one of his ammunition factories near a Bulgarian town called Montana, where mortar rounds of various sizes are packed into green boxes and shipped around the world. He never revealed his connection with the Czech bombings and only reluctantly talked about the two times he was poisoned.  ''If this is going to be some newspaper gossip, I'm not going to talk about it,'' he said at the start of one of our meetings.  Mr. Gebrev has also been reluctant to discuss his company's relationship with Ukraine. Initially, he said it had ceased all ammunition exports to the country at the start of the war in 2014. But on Friday, he acknowledged that Emco signed a contract with ''authorized Ukrainian companies'' in late 2014 after the war had begun. In an earlier email, Mr. Gebrev insisted that the weapons stored in the Czech depots had not been earmarked for Ukraine.  One current and one former Ukrainian official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss classified military information, said Emco signed a contract in 2014 to provide artillery ammunition for the Ukrainian military. To prevent Russian sympathizers in the Bulgarian government from blocking the shipments, the boxes of ammunition were labeled as if they were destined for Thailand, the former official said. (Mr. Gebrev denied that his company had mislabeled any of its exports.)  The Russian government discovered the shipments anyway, according the former official, and pressured the Bulgarian government to put an end to them.  Providing military assistance to the Ukrainian government at any time since 2014 would have been playing with fire.  After pro-democracy protesters toppled the Kremlin's puppet government there, Russian special forces units wearing unmarked uniforms seized and annexed the Crimean Peninsula and also instigated a separatist uprising that is still ongoing in the east. Meanwhile, Russian assassins fanned out across the country, killing senior Ukrainian military and intelligence officials who were central to the war effort, according to Ukrainian officials.  In a news conference this week, the Czech Republic's prime minister, Andrej Babis, said the explosions were ''an unprecedented attack on Czech soil,'' but made clear that the real target was not his country but ''goods belonging to a Bulgarian arms dealer.''  The explosions, which took place in October and December 2014, were initially attributed to a technical malfunction. It is unclear how, seven years later, the Czech authorities concluded that the blasts were acts of Russian sabotage.  Czech security officials identified two suspects, whom they said arrived in the country just before the first explosion and visited the depot near the city of Vrbetice, pretending to be buyers from Tajikistan's military. The fake names they used to enter the facility, Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov, were the same as those used four years later by the two men who poisoned Mr. Skripal in Salisbury.  The Czech Republic has long been a staging area for Russian intelligence operations, Western security experts say. The Russian Embassy in Prague, the capital, is one of the country's largest in Europe. All of the 18 embassy officials expelled by the Czech government so far in response to the explosions are believed to be spies.  One person in the embassy, Viktor Budyak, received his accreditation in early 2020 to serve as deputy military attaché. He had once served as a senior officer with Unit 29155 and likely was involved in supporting the unit's activities in the Czech Republic and elsewhere in Eastern Europe in recent years, according to a European security official who has tracked Mr. Budyak's career.  There are indications that the mission was a top priority for the Kremlin. Using travel records, the investigative organization Bellingcat determined that Maj. Gen. Andrei V. Averyanov, the commander of Unit 29155, traveled undercover to Vienna days before the explosions and possibly drove into the Czech Republic to the town of Ostrava where, according to the Czech authorities, the men using the names Petrov and Boshirov stayed during the operation.  That Russian spies would carryout military-style sabotage operations outside wartime has shaken many in Europe.  ''I think for public opinion, not only in the Czech Republic, but for others in the European Union, this is shocking,'' said David Stulik, a senior analyst at the Prague-based European Values Center for Security Policy. ''It sheds light on how Russia is treating our countries.''  Boryana Dzhambazova contributed reporting from Sofia, Bulgaria, and Hana de Goeij from Prague.  Boryana Dzhambazova contributed reporting from Sofia, Bulgaria, and Hana de Goeij from Prague.  A destroyed depot near the Czech city of Vrbetice, where the arms merchant Emilian Gebrev said he was storing ammunition, in October 2014. Officials last week tied the attack to Russian operatives. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CZECH REPUBLIC POLICE/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00051 "
197		"   ASK REAL ESTATE  Can the Sellers Take the Chandelier When They Move Out of the House?  By Ronda Kaysen  551 words 25 April 2021   2     In a typical sale, anything affixed to the walls, floors or ceilings stays with the house. But there's always room for negotiation.  Q: After my offer on a Westchester house was accepted, my broker told me that the sellers wanted to keep the dining room chandelier and the bathroom sconces, and replace them with building-grade fixtures. This seems so strange. I thought fixtures were part of the house. I don't want to lose this house over a couple of sconces and a chandelier, but packing them up and taking them away seems petty. What if the sellers decide they want to take more items out of the house before the closing?  A: The sellers are not obligated to include chandeliers or sconces with the sale, but they should have made their intentions clear before they listed the property.  The sale of a house is an emotional process -- sellers may feel attached to fixtures they carefully selected and want to hold onto them. But a buyer is also making an emotional decision, based in part on the décor in the rooms. Find out later that these things were not really part of the house, and you may feel hoodwinked.  ''I've lost a deal over chandeliers,'' said Marcene Hedayati, the principal broker at Corcoran Legends Realty in Tarrytown, N.Y., adding that the listing agent should discuss these kinds of details with the seller before the house hits the market. ''Half the time these issues arise because of a lack of communication.''  In a typical sale, anything affixed to the walls, floors or ceilings -- including appliances, medicine cabinets and light fixtures -- stays with the house. But a seller is not obliged to stick to that standard.  Now that you're at the bargaining table, ask for more information, because anything is negotiable and nothing is assumed. Generally, shades and blinds are included in a sale, though drapery is not. But a seller might feel attached to those Roman shades and decide to box them up. If they do, you should know before you sign the contract, and they need to be replaced with a building-grade alternative. Appliances usually stay, but double check, especially if the items are brand-new or high end. A mounted flat-screen television is generally considered a personal item, but if the seller takes it down, the wall needs to be repaired.  On the flip side, the sellers may have items they'd prefer to leave behind, like an old swing set, piano or pool table -- belongings that are unwieldy and may not get used anymore. If the seller is looking to unload such an item, consider it a bargaining chip: Trade a few sconces for an unwanted trampoline, and everyone is happy.  As Kimberly Renzi, an associate broker at Redfin in Westchester, put it: ''I've seen buyers accept that and never play pool or never play piano, but they have them in the house.''  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  To submit your questions or comments, email realestateqa@nytimes.com.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Nadia Pillon FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004z "
198		"    Al Young, 81, an Author and a Poet With a Musical Bent  By Neil Genzlinger  1,326 words 25 April 2021   31     Mr. Young, who served for three years as California's poet laureate and also wrote about jazz, was known for his readings, which often incorporated music.  Al Young, an acclaimed poet and jazz aficionado who merged his two areas of interest in books and in poetry readings that often incorporated a musical element, died on April 17 at a care center in Concord, Calif. He was 81.  The cause was complications of a stroke he had in 2019, his son, Michael, said. Before the stroke he had been a longtime resident of Berkeley, Calif., and before that of Palo Alto.  Mr. Young, who published his first volume of poetry, ''Dancing,'' in 1969, was California's poet laureate from 2005 to 2008, years he spent advocating for poetry and bringing it to audiences of all sorts. He also wrote novels (the first, ''Snakes,'' came out in 1970) and books he called musical memoirs, in which he mingled reflections on music, especially jazz and the blues, and personal experiences.  ''I came up with jazz and through jazz and under the influence of jazz,'' he wrote of his childhood in ''Mingus/Mingus: Two Memoirs'' (1989), a joint reflection on the bassist and composer Charles Mingus that he wrote with Janet Coleman.  He thought poetry and music were close cousins, though he viewed the relationship differently than some earlier poets had.  ''I don't think of poetry and jazz the same way the Beatniks did,'' he told The Contra Costa Times, a California newspaper, in 2006. ''They recited their poetry to a musical accompaniment, but I see it as a dialogue.''  The blues were as important to Mr. Young as jazz. ''The Blues Don't Change,'' from his 1982 poetry collection of the same title, was an ode to the music that included this passage:  You know how to sting  where I can't scratch, and you move from frying  pan to skillet the same way you move people  to go to wiggling their bodies, juggling their  limbs, loosening that goose, upping their voices,  opening their pores, rolling their hips and lips.  They can shake their bodies but they can't shake you.  Though he was a scholar himself, Mr. Young was not the kind of poet whose works must be scrutinized by scholars to discern their meaning, and he was not a fan of that sort of poetic elitism.  ''The more your poetry offers an opportunity for professors to teach and explain, the bigger your reputation,'' he told The San Luis Obispo Tribune in 2008. ''If you write for people directly, they don't have much use for you.''  He also thought that confessional poetry, in vogue in recent decades, had its limits.  ''There is only so much you can say about yourself that will be interesting,'' he told Appalachian Today, the online publication of Appalachian State University, in advance of an appearance there in 2017.  He would urge students and other audiences to write poems that explored the world around them. His own work included personal poems, but one of his favorites to recite involved incarceration and was called ''Conjugal Visits.'' Another, ''The Slots,'' published in Willow Springs magazine in 1984, was about the lure of those one-armed bandits. It began this way:  The sane you watches  the insane you finally  recover the money you  prayed to get back  to get even & get out  at last. The you who  knows everything registers  this & stands or hovers  helplessly by the you buying  into your own dark dumbness.  Writing a poem, Mr. Young believed, was only part of the process. Reading it live -- something he did with a compelling, resonant voice -- was the other.  ''It's not complete,'' he told The San Francisco Chronicle in 2005, ''until someone processes it.''  Albert James Young was born on May 31, 1939, in Ocean Springs, Miss., near Biloxi. His mother, Mary Campbell, was the daughter of sharecroppers. He wrote about her in a poem from his first collection, ''The Birthday'':  She carried me around nine months  inside her fifteen year old self  before here I sit numbering it all  How I got from then to now  is the mystery that could fill a whole library  much less an arbitrary stanza  But of course you already know about that  from your own random suffering  & sudden inexplicable bliss  Mr. Young always considered the man his mother married when he was a baby, also named Albert James Young, to be his father, Michael Young said.  Glimpses of Mr. Young's childhood turned up in his poetry and nonfiction books. In his introduction to ''Something About the Blues,'' a 2008 poetry collection that included a CD of Mr. Young's poetry readings, he wrote of an influential early teacher.  ''As early as 1947 -- in a second-grade classroom at the Kingston Elementary School for Colored in Laurel, Mississippi -- Miz Chapman, my tireless and inspired all-day second-grade teacher, was smuggling down to me the majesty and magic of poetry and the blues,'' he wrote. ''An unrepentant and dogmatic Afro-Christian, who regarded the blues as devilish, Miz Chapman nevertheless forced us to memorize poems, especially works by colored writers.''  The family later moved to Detroit, where, Mr. Young wrote in a 1999 essay for Salon, he developed a crush on a girl a few grades ahead of him: Erma Franklin, sister of Aretha.  ''With her pretty brown eyes, her soft hip moves, her smile the River Nile, Erma Franklin put the whammy on me,'' he wrote. ''She had a grown-up way about her that frightened and thrilled.''  His father had a huge stash of 78 r.p.m. records, and in ''Drowning in the Sea of Love: Musical Memoirs'' (1995), Mr. Young wrote of sitting around a coal-burning heater listening to them.  In 1957 he graduated from Central High School in Detroit, where he had been editor of the school newspaper, and enrolled at the University of Michigan. He left there after three years and settled on the West Coast.  He held a series of jobs, including disc jockey, and made a start on a career as a folk singer, but eventually decided he preferred writing. In 1969 he completed his degree at the University of California, Berkeley, where he majored in English and Spanish. He went on to teach or serve as writer in residence at Berkeley, Stanford University and other institutions.  Though he didn't often agree politically with Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican and California's governor from 2003 to 2011, it was Mr. Schwarzenegger who selected him as poet laureate. Mr. Young took the job seriously, championing poetry and making a point of doing readings and giving talks in prisons, farming communities and other places where poetry might not have much of a presence.  In 2007 he made ''a poet laureate top-to-bottom tour,'' as he called it, which started at the California-Oregon border and went all the way down to his state's southern deserts; he made 40 stops in 11 days, he said, giving readings paired with music.  Mr. Young and Arline June Belch married in 1963. They separated in 1985 but remained married until her death in 2016. In addition to their son, Mr. Young's survivors include two sisters, Michelle and Avida.  One of Mr. Young's poems, ''Who I Am in Twilight,'' is included in the Addison Street Poetry Walk in Berkeley, a sidewalk with 128 poems embedded in it. It ends: ''like Yosemite National Park, like beans &/cornbread, like rest & recreation, like love/& like, I know we last. I know our bleeding stops.''  Al Young in the 1960s. He merged his areas of interest. (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA YOUNG FAMILY); Mr. Young reading his work at a local radio station in California in the 1990s. He was known for his compelling, resonant voice. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL YOUNG)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004y "
199		"   House & Home/ Five Dishes To Cook This Week  By Margaux Laskey  615 words 25 April 2021   5     Hi, guys. Margaux Laskey here filling in again for Em. How's your week been? Lovely, I hope.  A few weeks ago, Jessica Grose, a columnist for NYT Parenting, asked newsletter readers about their best pandemic buys, and I'm curious: What have been your favorite cooking-related purchases in the past year? For me, it's a tie between a waffle maker, which I've used all year to make Melissa Clark's crisp, perfect yeast-risen waffles, and a Solo Stove fire pit, which made socially distanced backyard dinners (and s'mores) possible even in snowy February. What about you?  While you think on it, here are five delicious dishes. Emily will be back next week. Thanks for having me.  [ Sign up here to receive the Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter in your inbox every Friday.]  1. Mushroom Pasta Stir-Fry  Hetty McKinnon smartly replaces spaghetti for rice in this umami-rich vegetarian stir-fry, which comes together in about half an hour. Chinese five-spice powder, a heady combination of star anise, cloves, Chinese cinnamon, Sichuan peppercorns and fennel, bolsters the earthy flavor of the mushrooms. (It's available at most markets, or you can make your own.) Broccolini, or broccoli, if that's what you've got, adds texture and a welcome bit of green.  View this recipe.  _____  2. Farro With Blistered Tomatoes, Pesto and Spinach  ''This was incredible!'' ''Just divine!'' ''Phenomenal.'' Readers are loving this vibrant vegetarian dish from Yasmin Fahr for its versatility and ease of prep. Try substituting ricotta salata, feta, seared halloumi or burrata for the mozzarella; shallots for the onions, pasta for the farro. You do you.  View this recipe.  _____  3. Skillet Chicken With Orzo, Dill and Feta  This recipe from Sarah Copeland is the Mary Poppins of one-pot chicken dishes -- practically perfect in every way. (That Disney+ subscription is really paying off.) Silky orzo, tender chicken, salty feta, cold cucumbers: It's got it all. I've made it with bone-in chicken pieces as well as boneless chicken thighs, but if you use the thighs, reduce the cooking time so as not to end up with rubbery chicken.  View this recipe.  _____  4. White Bean Caprese Salad  Let's say it's Thursday night, and the thought of cooking makes you want to cry. Enter Colu Henry's white bean, mozzarella and tomato salad. Toss it all together and serve it with good crusty bread and a Negroni.  View this recipe.  _____  5. Roasted Shrimp and Pineapple With Peanut Sauce  Whenever I make this blissfully simple, Thai-inspired recipe from Melissa Clark, I end up spooning half of the tangy peanut sauce directly into my mouth from the blender. It's that good. To save time, skip the skewers and place the shrimp and pineapple on opposite ends of a sheet pan before broiling. Serve with plain white rice or Tejal Rao's coconut rice.  View this recipe.  Thanks for reading. Previous newsletters are archived here . If you like what you see, please consider subscribing to NYT Cooking . (Or give a subscription as a gift ! Mother's Day? Father's Day? Arbor Day?) Follow NYT Cooking on Instagram , Facebook and Pinterest . Email Emily at dearemily@nytimes.com , though if you're having troubles with your account, email cookingcare@nytimes.com .  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRYAN GARDNER FOR THE new_york_times. FOOD STYLIST: BARRETT WASHBURNE.; EVAN SUNG FOR THE new_york_times; BEATRIZ DA COSTA FOR THE new_york_times. FOOD STYLIST: REBECCA JURKEVICH.; JULIA GARTLAND FOR THE new_york_times (PHOTOGRAPHY AND STYLING); DAVID MALOSH FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004x "
200		"   STRATEGIES Money and U Now That Everyone Is Bullish, Exercise Caution  By Jeff Sommer  1,314 words 25 April 2021   5     The economy and the stock market have churned out spectacular numbers, and investor optimism is high. But don't forget to hedge your bets.  As vaccinations spread in the United States, the stock market has been generating fabulous returns. Many of the economic numbers have been nearly as impressive.  If you have held on to broadly diversified stock funds over the last year, reading your latest portfolio statement will be a joyful experience. In the 12 months through Friday, the S&P 500 stock market index returned more than 50 percent, including dividends. From the market's low point in March 2020 through Friday, it returned more than 80 percent.  As an investor, you aren't likely to see many years like this. Savor those exorbitant gains while you can.  But when numbers this gaudy appear, it's worth asking why. And, unfortunately, the most accurate answer is probably the simplest: Things were so terrible a year ago, they had nowhere to go but up.  There have been a few mediocre stretches in the stock market lately. But compared with the early days of the pandemic in the United States, we have entered a period of balm and bliss.  The endless tragedies of the last year, followed by a partial, cash-infused recovery, have skewed the numbers enough that any comparisons should be taken with an entire shaker of salt.  But there are harbingers of trouble already: signs of incipient inflation, rising bond yields, occasional tremors in global markets in response to coronavirus flare-ups or to the reports on Thursday that higher capital gains taxes may be coming for the truly rich. For the most part, though, these portents are being muffled by the profit making.  Recall how bad it was  Consider what happened in the markets in the early stages of the pandemic, and what it has taken to fuel their ascent.  Briefly put, when people began to sicken and die and the awful toll of the novel coronavirus began to be understood in North America, the markets and the economy crashed. Those are not words I'd use casually, but they are appropriate here. In a little over one month, from Feb. 19, 2020, to March 23, the stock market fell 34 percent.  As businesses shuttered and workers stayed home, the gross domestic product, a broad measure of goods and services, plummeted in the United States. G.D.P. dropped 5 percent in the first quarter of 2020 and more than 31 percent in the second, according to the federal Bureau of Economic Analysis. The unemployment rate surged more than 10 percentage points from March to April last year, nearly reaching 15 percent. That was the highest level and the biggest increase since the Bureau of Labor Statistics began collecting data in January 1948.  In March 2020, the Federal Reserve stepped in. On its own, it couldn't do much to combat the coronavirus itself -- the last presidential administration's efforts were dilatory at best, historians say. But the Fed and the federal government were able to prop up the markets, provide emergency aid for millions of people, help keep at least some small businesses afloat and put most major corporations in a position to reap big profits as the economy rebounded.  By now, the federal government has committed more than $5 trillion in a variety of coronavirus-related aid packages, and the Fed has made trillions more available in loans, intervened in financial markets, purchased vast quantities of bonds and held short-term interest rates near zero.  The Biden boom  All of this is contributing to what looks like a ''Biden boom economy,'' as the Princeton economist Alan S. Blinder called it in The Wall Street Journal. Economic growth may exceed 7 percent for the first quarter, and will almost certainly be spectacular for the year as a whole, when compared with 2020.  But there's the rub. These annual economic and financial numbers are comparisons with the depths of the pandemic. The statistics are warped, inevitably, by ''base effects,'' which is to say, in economic jargon, that the coronavirus-induced recession of last year is making many current numbers look unnaturally high. They don't provide much insight about where we are heading in 2022 and later.  Take inflation, for example  As Neil Irwin explained in The new_york_times, the current uptick in inflation may not be as worrisome as it would otherwise seem because its comparisons are based on the depressed prices of a year ago, when so many people were huddled indoors.  What's more, Alberto Cavallo, a Harvard economist who has studied inflation deeply, told me that by altering consumption and supply patterns radically, the pandemic has had many subtle effects. Lower-income people, for example, who pay a higher proportion of their income for food, have experienced greater inflation than those for whom food is a relatively minor expense.  On the supply side, he said, a vast array of items became difficult or impossible to find as supply chains were disrupted. Because of concerns about the ''fairness'' of raising prices during a global disaster, many distributors refrained from doing so. They have started now, Professor Cavallo said. And prices have begun to rise on items for which demand is reviving, like fuel and transportation.  As a consequence, inflation is indeed increasing, and worries that it will continue to do so have contributed to rising yields in the bond market. (Bond prices, which move in the opposite direction as yields, have declined.) Because low interest rates have made equities comparatively attractive, these shifts in longer-term interest rates could easily derail the bull market in stocks.  Both the White House Council of Economic Advisers and the Fed have taken a rosier view of inflation, saying that although the numbers will probably rise over the next several months, they are likely to abate over time and won't threaten the economy.  Wall Street appears to have accepted a version of this narrative, too: Robust growth and rising corporate profits will support a rising stock market, without much risk of unacceptably high levels of inflation. Or so the currently rich share valuations imply.  Risk abounds, even if it is not discussed  But the risk is there, even if it's not widely recognized. You don't need to be a disciple of Milton Friedman, the great monetarist, to see it.  He once said: ''Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.'' Well, the Fed has been pumping money into the economy since the start of the pandemic, and the money supply measurement, known as M2, is increasing as rapidly as it ever has in modern times, Fed data shows. By the end of this year, it is on track to expand by 40 percent above its prepandemic level.  As Ian Shepherdson, chief economist of Pantheon Macroeconomics, an independent research firm, put it: ''Nothing remotely like this has ever happened before, and you don't have to be a monetarist to regard such a massive monetary expansion as a potential inflation threat.''  There are other threats to the recovery and the bull market, too many to enumerate. The possibility of calamity cannot be ruled out, as Robert Shiller observed in a look back at the effervescent 1920s, which ended in the Great Depression.  Bonds, which are lagging now, are likely to outperform stocks if the market turns really ugly, which is why I hold some bonds. If you believe that you are likely to get stronger returns from the stock market over the very long run, as I do, this is a time to prepare for a bumpy road ahead.  Hang in there, but don't be too greedy.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Minh Uong/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004w "
201		"    Selling Your Home in a Sellers' Market  By Daniel Bortz  1,756 words 25 April 2021   7     Sorting through multiple bids can be harder than it seems. Choosing the highest offer isn't always the smart way to go.  By the time they got the last offer, Quinn and Daryn Shapurji had received 54 bids on their four-bedroom, single-family house in Fishers, Ind., in just three days. Ms. Shapurji said they felt totally overwhelmed -- and a bit melancholy.  ''We felt bad that we had to say no to so many people, because we got a lot of beautiful letters from buyers saying how much they loved our house and why they wanted to live in the area,'' said Ms. Shapurji, 32, a closing coordinator for a home builder. ''Some buyers had already struck out on five or six homes.''  Chris Dossman, the couple's real estate agent, suggested they take a cash offer that was $25,000 above their home's list price of $220,000. ''It wasn't the highest offer they received, but the cash buyer waived the appraisal, so we knew that we weren't going to have an issue with the home closing from a financing perspective,'' said Ms. Dossman, an agent with Century 21 Scheetz based in Indianapolis.  ''Fifty-four offers is by far the highest number of offers that I've ever received for a listing,'' added Ms. Dossman, who has been an agent for 15 years.  The Shapurjis, who closed their deal in mid-March, are far from alone when it comes to getting flooded with offers in today's supercharged real estate market. Nearly two-thirds (64 percent) of offers written by Redfin agents in March faced bidding wars, marking the 11th straight month where more than half of Redfin offers encountered competition, according to the online brokerage. Salt Lake City, Pittsburgh, and Boise, Idaho, were the most competitive markets of the 24 metropolitan areas that the company analyzed.  Despite a recent uptick in mortgage rates, an acute shortage of homes for sale nationwide has created a home-buying frenzy. ''Higher mortgage rates haven't slowed down competition yet,'' said Daryl Fairweather, Redfin's chief economist. ''In fact, the interest rate increase from 2.67 percent at the end of 2020 to 3.09 percent now is just enough to fuel more bidding wars as folks rush to buy while rates are still low,'' she said, referring to the rate for a 30-year fixed rate mortgage in mid-March. ''It will take a bigger rate increase to really move the needle on bidding wars and cool things down.''  ''We're seeing an inventory crisis,'' said Katie Wethman, a Washington, D.C.-based real estate agent at Keller Williams Realty. Indeed, total home supply at the end of March sat at only 1.07 million units, down 28.2 percent from a year ago, according to a report from the National Association of Realtors. The association's data also found that homes typically sold in a record-low time of just 18 days in March, down from a 29-day average in March 2020.  ''The market is completely lopsided right now in favor of sellers,'' said Seth Lejeune, a real estate agent at RE/MAX Homepoint in Royersford, Pa. ''Some homes are selling within hours and with multiple offers.''  Still, sellers face a challenge: ''Getting inundated with offers can be overwhelming, and it can make it harder for sellers to choose the best offer,'' said Alicia Stoughton, a real estate agent and designer at Keller Williams Advisors in Cincinnati, Ohio.  Why? Because ''the highest offer isn't always the best offer,'' Ms. Stoughton said.  Here are the factors sellers should consider, in addition to purchase price, when evaluating multiple offers.  Payment Method  ''Cash is king,'' according to Nancy Newquist-Nolan, a real estate agent at Coldwell Banker in Santa Barbara, Calif. ''I often recommend sellers take a cash offer, even if it's not the highest offer.''  Choosing a cash buyer has several benefits for sellers. A cash offer means the buyer won't have to face any trouble getting approved for a mortgage; it enables the buyer to waive a potentially deal-breaking home appraisal; and cash transactions allow for shorter closings periods, Ms. Newquist-Nolan. (Cash sales can take as little as 14 days, while mortgage closings usually take 30 to 60 days.) That may explain why a cash offer quadruples a home buyer's chances of winning a bidding war, a new Redfin report found.  ''In some cases buyers are taking money out of their retirement plans or borrowing from family to make a cash offer,'' said Gary Metchnek, a real estate agent at Edina Realty in Minneapolis-St. Paul, who recently sold a home that received 13 offers.  Still, mortgage buyers aren't completely out of the running, said Ms. Wethman. ''If you're confident in the buyer's lender and their ability to get approved for a mortgage, there's not a lot of risk taking an offer from a buyer who's getting a loan,'' she said. Her advice to sellers? ''Do your due diligence on the lender who is providing the funds,'' she recommends.  This is a step where sellers can lean on their listing agent, Ms. Newquist-Nolan said. ''I call up the lender and ask how qualified the buyer is for their loan,'' she said. Moreover, ''some lenders are notorious for dragging their feet and missing key deadlines.''  (Many brokers prefer deals with buyers who work with a local lender like a regional credit union, instead of a big bank or a national website. This is because loan officers at local lenders are typically more accessible on nights and weekends, which can be important in this fast-moving market when a buyer might need a preapproval letter that lists a property's address on short notice.)  Offers from conventional loan borrowers are also more attractive than loans backed by the Federal Housing Administration and the Department of Veterans Affairs, Mr. Lejeune said. ''F.H.A. and V.A. loans are pretty much dead on arrival right now, because their appraisals have more restrictions and they might require the seller to make home repairs before their home can be sold,'' he said.  Pam and Richard O'Bryant can attest to that. The couple, who sold their three-bedroom, single-family house in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, in March after receiving nine offers, struggled to buy a home in Northern Virginia, using a V.A. loan.  They lost bids on four homes, despite bidding about 10 percent above the asking price on each of them, before finally purchasing a three-bedroom rowhouse in Alexandria, Va., an estate sale that will need about $125,000 to $150,000 in renovations.  ''I'm not sure if I'm more relieved or excited to have finally gotten a house in today's market,'' Ms. O'Bryant said. ''We really wanted to capitalize on today's interest rates and are looking forward to creating a fabulous home.''  Ms. Stoughton said sellers who haven't yet purchased their next home should strongly consider buyers who will offer a rent-back agreement. ''Most buyers in our market right now are throwing in a free rent-back,'' she said. ''Usually sellers pay the buyer to rent back their home.''  Contingencies  ''Right now, sellers are in the position where they can direct buyers to have as few contingencies as possible,'' Ms. Newquist-Nolan, the California broker, said. That's a smart move, she said, because fewer contingencies means fewer opportunities when a transaction might fall through.  Take home inspections for example. From September 2020 through February 2021, 13.2 percent of winning Redfin offers had waived the inspection contingency, up from 7.3 percent a year ago, the brokerage reports. (Such a contingency would allow buyers to pull out of a deal if an inspection uncovered unexpected repair issues.) ''Most buyers are waiving home inspections right now in our area,'' Ms. Wethman said. ''Pre-offer inspections have become the norm.''  Most sellers are now open to allowing buyers to bring in a home inspector before they make an offer on a home. A pre-offer inspection that finds few problems could give a buyer the confidence to waive an inspection contingency, which subsequently might make the buyer's offer a more appealing choice for the seller.  Buyers are also finding ways to waive home appraisal contingencies, in an effort to make their bid more attractive to a seller. (Appraisal contingencies allow buyers to terminate a contract if an appraisal comes in lower than their offer price.)  ''Some buyers who are putting down 20 percent are agreeing to reduce their down payment to pay the difference if there's an appraisal gap,'' Ms. Wethman said. For example, in a deal where a buyer is offering $300,000 for a home, and has a 20 percent down payment, if the house is appraised at $270,000, the buyer could drop their down payment to 10 percent, and use that 10 percent in cash to make up the appraisal shortfall.  Comparing Apples to Apples  The best approach that sellers can take when weighing offers, Mr. Lejeune said, is to compare them side-by-side.  His strategy: ''I present offers to my clients in an Excel spreadsheet that specifics the offer price, loan amount, type of loan, contingencies, and other important metrics,'' he said. ''It's basically a cheat sheet for sellers.''  Ms. Dossman is also a fan of presenting offers in a spreadsheet. As she puts it, ''You want to have all the information in front of you when you're making a decision.''  Many buyers attach personal letters with their offers to try to sway the sellers in their favor. But some real estate agents don't even show sellers these letters when they present offers to avoid the possibility of unlawful bias against a buyer. But Ms. Dossman said she will share letters after vetting them to make sure there isn't any information that could raise the potential for fair housing violations.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  Top, Quinn and Daryn Shapurji got 54 offers on their house in Fishers, Ind., in three days. Above, Pam and Richard O'Bryant sold their house in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, after getting nine bids. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STACY ABLE FOR THE new_york_times; DARREN S. HIGGINS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004v "
202		"   SCRATCH Money and U What It's Like to Win an Oscar  By Julia Rothman and Shaina Feinberg  62 words 25 April 2021   4     One filmmaker on winning an Academy Award: The best champagne ever, plus Mark Ruffalo leading the way.  Julia Rothman is an illustrator. Shaina Feinberg is a writer and filmmaker. Both live in Brooklyn.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Julia Rothman FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004u   "
203		"   RORY SMITH ON SOCCER  The Super League Got One Big Thing Right  By Rory Smith  2,616 words 25 April 2021   35     The plan hatched by Europe's elite clubs was wrong on almost every level, but its architects got one thing right: Soccer's economy, as it stands, does not work.  Sign up for Rory Smith's weekly newsletter on world soccer, delivered every Friday, at nytimes.com/rory .  After all that, there is one thing we still do not know. We know what the dozen venture capitalists and industrialists and petrochemical princelings behind the Super League intended to do. We know what the future they had mapped out would have looked like. We know, or we can at least imagine, the damage they might have done.  What we do not know, not really, is why.  We have the platitudes, of course, the blandishments offered by Florentino Pérez, the president of Real Madrid, in that brash appearance on a gaudy Spanish talk show: that this was the only way to save soccer, that the rising tide lifts all boats, that there was no other option.  And we have the presumption, too, the Occam's razor explanation: that deep down this was about nothing more than money, the relentless, insatiable, metastasizing pursuit of it, a cynical and grasping attempt to hoard as much of it as possible, made by those who already have far more than most, and far more than they need.  But while one of those points is considerably more valid than the other, neither quite satisfactorily explains what united these 12 disparate club owners behind a single, slapdash scheme like the Super League. They have, after all, spent much of the last decade quarreling among themselves. Their motivations, priorities and concerns are all quite different. They are, in the cold light of day, not so much one another's solutions as they are one another's problems. So the question stands: Why?  It is easiest, perhaps, to divide the 12 into three groups. In one, there are the English teams under American, or American-inflected, ownership: Liverpool, Manchester United, Arsenal and Tottenham. Their aim is not just to make more money, it is also to spend less of it. They want cost controls, salary caps, financial regulation. They want stable income, and restricted expenditures.  Their issue is the presence, in European soccer, of the second group: the outlier teams, Manchester City and Chelsea, backed by owners who would favor the abolition of such limitations. Their principal interest is in using their private wealth to gain a competitive edge. They are not involved in soccer to make money. They care little for the bottom line. They are here to win popular acclaim, and, through it, obtain cultural and political legitimacy.  And then there is the third group, comprising the six Spanish and Italian teams. Their problem is not only the bottomless wealth of Manchester City and Chelsea and a few others, but also the existence of the first group. The financial juggernaut that is the Premier League has inflated salaries around Europe. It has placed Real Madrid, Barcelona and the rest at a disadvantage in the transfer market. It has forced them to build up mountains of debt, leaving teams that believe themselves to be in soccer's front rank facing a second-class future.  Clearly, they all decided -- some with rather more consideration than others -- that a superleague was their way out. The first group could write in various cost-control measures, denting the power of the second group, leveling their private playing field; in exchange, City and Chelsea would get the prestige that made their projects work. The third group, meanwhile, would no longer have to gaze longingly at the Premier League's broadcasting deals.  That it did not work is a blessing, of course. That it was scuttled within 48 hours of its launch -- undone, almost immediately, by a startling combination of amateurish planning, botched communications and underestimated backlash -- was greeted as a victory for the sport as a whole, a blow delivered by the masses to the aristocrats, a bloody nose for the forces of global capitalism.  And, to some extent, that is precisely what it was. The threat of a superleague, in one form or another, has hung like a cloud over European soccer for decades. It has been wheeled out every few years, surfacing in every negotiation over how the money generated by the Champions League, in particular, should be divided.  Now that has gone. It is possible that, by the end of this weekend, as either Manchester City or Tottenham celebrates winning the League Cup, as Bayern Munich inches ever closer to yet another Bundesliga title, as Inter Milan closes in on a Serie A crown, all of this will feel like a fever dream. On the surface, it will be behind us. The insurrection will have been defeated, condemned to the past. Everything will be back to normal.  But that is an illusion, because though the Super League never had a chance to play a game -- it barely had time to build out a website -- it may yet prove the catalyst to the salvation of soccer. It has, after all, stripped the elite of their leverage. They played their cards, and the whole thing became a bluff. Now, for the first time in years, power resides in the collective strength of the game's lesser lights.  They will need to use it. The Super League was wrong on almost every level, but though its architects never quite had the nerve to come out and say it, they did get one thing right. Soccer's economy and ecosystem, as they stand, do not work.  This was recognition of what ultimately explains how 12 teams, in those three distinct groups, could stand together under the same flag, albeit briefly, albeit without seeming to notice that it was adorned with a skull-and-crossbones.  The status quo does not work for the American owners who need cost controls. It does not work for the grand old houses of continental Europe, who cannot compete with the Premier League's riches. And infinitely more important, it does not work for almost everyone else.  It does not work for the teams condemned to life as cannon fodder for Manchester City or Paris St.-Germain, or for the domestic competitions withering in the long shadows of the Premier League, La Liga and the Bundesliga, or for the famous names -- Ajax and Benfica and Red Star Belgrade -- reduced to bit-part roles in European tournaments, ever farther from a return to their glory days.  Aleksander Ceferin, the president of UEFA and the man who led the counterattack in what will come to be known as the Sunday-Tuesday War, knows that. The issue of competitive balance is the one that animated his rise to his current position. One of the many ironies of this whole sorry farrago is not only that those whom Ceferin fought know it, too, but that they have given him the perfect opportunity to do something about it.  Those governing bodies that resisted the Super League make for unlikely heroes. UEFA has, after all, been no less complicit than the domestic leagues and national federations in selling out soccer to the highest bidder. It has, for decades, not only sat by and watched but also actively encouraged the influx of money into the game, never once questioning where it might all be heading.  A charitable interpretation would be that all of them were in thrall to, or in fear of, the elite teams. Suddenly, though, there is no longer need to be afraid. Behind Ceferin there is a confederation of governments and executives and players and fans, all of whom have made plain their objection to soccer's inexorable journey down this same path.  Now there is the impetus and the appetite for change: not their change, the kind that would barricade the elite in their palaces, insulating them from the currents and the crisis outside their gates, but change that might allow more teams to benefit from the rewards the breakaway clubs sought to cordon off for themselves.  What form that might take is open for discussion. The rolling back of the reforms to the Champions League, passed this week while soccer was engulfed by civil war? A rebalancing of the way money is shared in the Premier League, after years of gradual erosion of the egalitarian principle that stands as the competition's bedrock? Increased solidarity payments from UEFA across the Continent?  Whatever the next move is to be, it requires more than the commitment of all of those who stood against the Super League and the willingness of lawmakers to take action, rather than just to score cheap political points. It also needs fans to establish, among themselves, quite how far they are willing to go, exactly what they mean by change.  In those first few hours after the Super League was announced, a narrative took hold, particularly in England. This was, it went, an attempt by American owners to remake soccer in their own image: They wanted a closed league, one more like the N.F.L. or the N.B.A., one in which stability of place brought security of income.  The parallel was imperfect, of course; it was, really, nothing more than a shorthand to explain and to demonize the structure of the proposed breakaway. Indeed, if anything, it is the suggestions for changes made in the aftermath of the Super League's launch and swift collapse that might remake European soccer along more American lines.  The prime difference between sports in the United States and soccer in Europe is dynasty. Dominant teams will, occasionally, surface in the major leagues of North America: The Golden State Warriors will win three championships in four seasons; the New England Patriots will sustain their success over nearly two decades.  But as a rule, there are checks and balances in place -- through player drafts and the presence of a salary cap -- to ensure that today's weak have at least a chance to become tomorrow's strong.  Soccer has no such mechanisms. It is, instead, driven by a desire not just for success now, but for success in perpetuity. It is a sport defined by dynasty. It is that which encourages not just teams like Barcelona and Real Madrid -- owned, in theory, by members, and therefore run by presidents who must seek re-election -- but also private entities, like Juventus and Manchester United, to spend recklessly in the pursuit of success.  It is not possible, the executives of those teams know, to sit out a season. It is not possible to rebuild slowly and carefully toward some distant aim. Teams are expected to compete now, to contend now, to win now. If they do not, managers are fired and players are sold and new managers are hired and new players are bought.  A season in which Bayern Munich does not win the Bundesliga is a disaster. Juventus, this summer, might fire a rookie coach because he has not won Serie A -- not just in his first season at the club, but in his first season, full stop. Liverpool has been treated, at times, as a laughingstock because a lengthy injury list stopped it from winning a second Premier League title a year after claiming its first in 30 years.  This is the sport's dominant ethos: That, as Alex Ferguson used to put it, once a trophy is won, you forget about it and seek to win the next. But while that is part of soccer's appeal -- that one victory is never enough -- it gives those that run its clubs a problem: There is always another triumph to plan, always another peak to conquer, always another player to buy. That is, ultimately, what fans have been conditioned to expect, and so that is what they demand.  Pérez, instinctively, understands that. It is why, in his second television appearance of the week, he mentioned that, without a Super League, Real Madrid could not countenance signing players like Kylian Mbappé or Erling Haaland. The finances, in his eyes, simply do not work (though that has, in fact, never stopped him before).  It was a transparent ploy, a form of emotional blackmail. Pérez knows that what matters most to Real Madrid fans is that the club should be making the sort of signings, building the sorts of teams, that can win the Champions League -- not just this year, but next, as well. Give us what we want, he said, and we can give you what you want.  But that approach is not sustainable in a model where wealth is spread more evenly. That does not make it bad; it does not even make it worse than what soccer has now. But that does make it different and, without changes in the way the sport is governed and in fan expectations, might also make it unsustainable.  It would not be possible, of course, for the elite to be forced to relinquish more of their revenue in a game that was still open to investments of the sort that supercharged the rise of Chelsea and Manchester City. It would not hold: All that would happen is that Everton or Newcastle United or Harrogate Town, with the aid of new backers, would trample unencumbered across the landscape.  More complex is that fans would have to redefine what success looks like. When Manchester United fans ask for the introduction of the admirable 50+1 rule -- borrowed from German soccer -- are they prepared to tolerate what follows? A watering-down of their own team's chances of trophies?  Will the Liverpool fans sincerely decrying their owners' greed be happy to have a year or two of seventh-place finishes as the team rebuilds? Do the Chelsea fans on the streets want a world where a good decade means one league title? It is this that Pérez was driving at: He has to spend money because his fans demand it, so to meet that demand, he needs more money.  The desire to share more of the lavish fruit of soccer's growth is sincerely held, and it is morally sound. The idea of a dozen or more teams harboring genuine championship hopes at the start of every season -- rather than the handful of clubs that do so now -- sounds faintly idyllic, like a return to soccer's roots.  But it would come at a cost: It would mean that at the end of the campaign, your traditionally elite team would be less likely to be the one standing tall. The redistribution of wealth means the redistribution of success, too.  Here, then, is another thing we do not know: Do those fans who stared down their owners this week for their greed and their ambition and their hubris want this to be the start of something new, or simply the safeguarding of the old? How much soccer can ever change will depend on the answer.  That's all for this week: There has, after all, only been one story in town. I've had plenty of communication on the Super League, but perhaps it is best gathered together next week. Any thoughts on the week that shook soccer should go to askrory@nytimes.com. Say what you like about the whole thing, but it's been great for my Twitter interactions. And you'll never guess the subject of this week's Set Piece Menu.  Have a great weekend.  A protest sign at Etihad Stadium, home of Manchester City, a member of the short-lived Super League. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLOTTE TATTERSALL/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004s "
204		"   She Helps Families of the Incarcerated  By Tammy La Gorce  881 words 25 April 2021   2     Her work is nonstop, but Soffiyah Elijah finds time in the wee hours of the morning to take a sauna and practice yoga and qigong.  It's been a challenging year for Soffiyah Elijah, the executive director of the Alliance of Families for Justice, an organization that supports New Yorkers with loved ones who are in prison. A recent Times report revealed that over the past year, incarcerated people had contracted the coronavirus at three times the rate as other Americans.  ''If you think how hard it is to deal with a prison sentence, imagine how hard it is now,'' said Ms. Elijah, who has been working on behalf of families and the criminal justice system for more than 40 years. After dealing last year with lockdowns and a lack of protective gear in prisons across the state, she is now focused on getting the Covid-19 vaccine to as many incarcerated New Yorkers as possible, following a recent ruling in late March by a judge in the Bronx.  It is not going as efficiently as she would like. ''I'm concerned that the Department of Corrections and Community Supervision is not moving with deliberate speed to comply with the court order,'' she said, adding that there are about 31,000 prisoners currently waiting for the vaccine.  Ms. Elijah, 65, lives in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, with one of her two adult sons.  GIVE ME STRENGTH I get up somewhere between 3 and 4 in the morning. One of my friends says the older you get the less sleep you need. I'm not sure if that's the reason. The first thing I do is a Kundalini yoga routine I've memorized.  Then I do qigong. There are several different varieties of qigong. I practice healing organ qigong, which is a set of different poses, each designed to optimize the flow of the life force to one of the five major organ systems: heart, liver, kidney, lungs, stomach/spleen, thereby strengthening and toning them.  SOME LIKE IT HOT About 5 in the morning, I treat myself to a sauna. I bought myself a mobile sauna because the sauna I love closed for Covid. It was something I really enjoyed. I don't have the luxury of lying down in the mobile sauna, which I would do in the public sauna, but there are still important health benefits.  FIRST ONE IN I have a shower and a protein drink, and depending on how empty the cupboard is, it may be time to grocery shop. I go to the Park Slope Co-Op or Trader Joe's. I'm standing there waiting when the doors open at 8 o'clock. I'm not someone who's a big fan of waiting in line.  MAINTENANCE At my desk, I start with my to-do list for the Alliance. As executive director, one of my primary tasks is to maintain relationships with major donors. These are by and large people I've known for years. I'll check in with them. I'll send out thank you notes to donors if that hasn't gotten done during the week.  CONDITIONS, CONCERNS We work with about 500 families. People know how to get a hold of me. They'll text me or email me about their concerns. When visits were happening, they'd contact me about guards not wearing masks or people being thrown in solitary. I always respond.  SOMETHING TO CELEBRATE It's the organization's five-year anniversary this year. We're planning a panel discussion about the 50th anniversary of the rebellion and massacre at Attica in September. Our organization was founded in commemoration of that anniversary back in 2016. It's a very important time of year for us. We're also planning a spring poetry event -- Danny Glover is our board chair, and we're hoping to honor someone he's friends with, Harry Belafonte. He's someone who's done a lot to move the needle for things we care about.  JUST ONE CHANNEL I may pause to cook or do some laundry. Friends will say to me, ''You need to take a break,'' but they've only ever known me on this channel. If I were to lie in bed and read a book on Sunday they would say, ''Are you OK? Should we call a medic?''  DISH FAIRY I'm not really on a set schedule, but I try to finish work by 8. I don't eat after 8, either. I'm vegan. For dinner I'll make curry mock duck, barbecue tofu or a large salad. The only thing that's important after that is making sure the dishes are clean. I like things orderly, and nobody's ever come in and cleaned my house for me. If they have, I've never met them.  SOOTHING BEATS At night I might listen to music. I like reggae, R&B, and soca and salsa. There's a D.J. I like called Ruben Toro, or I'll listen to Felix Hernandez's Saturday show on WBGO from the archives. I'll drift off about 10.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FLO NGALA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004r "
205		"   A Love Affair With a Bumpy, Twisted Path  By Ed Shanahan  2,089 words 25 April 2021   1     John DiRubba turned informant to foil a murder-for-hire plot. Or was he just an ex-lover seeking revenge?  John DiRubba fell hard for Valerie Cincinelli. He can't really explain it, just love at first sight.  He was living in Queens, and she was a police officer assigned to the local precinct. One day while she was out on patrol she stopped when she saw him washing his car. They began to chat, and she told him she was married.  ''Not happily,'' her partner shouted through the cruiser's open window. Ms. Cincinelli, as it happened, was going through a contentious divorce.  Mismatched in appearance and age -- he was burly, bald and just over 50; she was smaller and 20 years younger -- Mr. DiRubba and Ms. Cincinelli became nearly inseparable. They got matching '''til death'' tattoos on their left hands. He got one on his right that said ''Valerie.''  As the relationship proceeded, getting bumpy at times, Ms. Cincinelli's divorce dragged on. She was so angry about it that she began to talk of having her husband killed, suggesting that Mr. DiRubba arrange it. Then she had another idea, this one driven by jealousy.  ''When she threw my daughter into the mix ...'' Mr. DiRubba said in an interview, his voice trailing off.  Within months, in May 2019, Ms. Cincinelli was charged with scheming to have her boyfriend pay a hit man $7,000 in gold coins to kill her husband and, while he was at it, to run down her boyfriend's teenage daughter with a car. The boyfriend, federal prosecutors said, had gone to the F.B.I. instead.  The sensational accusations were irresistible to the tabloids, especially after Mr. DiRubba, who was not initially named as the boyfriend in question, emerged as the government's central witness, one with a blemished résumé. (For an F.B.I. informer, he was fairly chatty with reporters.)  Eventually, the bizarre case faded from the headlines. This month it appeared to be ending quietly, with Ms. Cincinelli pleading guilty to obstruction of justice and the government dropping the two murder-for-hire charges she faced.  ''I know what I did was wrong,'' she said when she entered her plea. ''I'm truly sorry, Your Honor.''  Through a spokesman, prosecutors declined to comment on the plea deal. But in a filing on Friday that was part of an effort to keep Ms. Cincinelli locked up until sentencing, they argued that the agreement ''did not, in any way, constitute an acknowledgment'' that they would have any trouble proving to a jury that she plotted to kill her husband and Mr. DiRubba's daughter.  The assertion was meant to counter the suggestion by Ms. Cincinelli's lawyer's that the hit man story had been fabricated by Mr. DiRubba -- a scorned lover seeking revenge.  Mr. DiRubba, 56, disputed that characterization himself, citing recordings he had made for the F.B.I.  ''It's Valerie's own words that got her arrested,'' he said in an interview.  By the time the two met, Ms. Cincinelli had been a police officer for a decade. She had spent much of her career at the 106th Precinct in Ozone Park, Queens, where she worked in a domestic violence unit.  ''I love kids,'' she told her college's alumni magazine in 2016. ''They're my soft spot.''  She had two of her own: a daughter from an earlier relationship and a son with Isaiah Carvalho Jr., whom she married in 2015.  The marriage to Mr. Carvalho was troubled, court records show: She obtained orders of protection against him, and he was referred to an anger-management class. (His lawyer said that he was ''completely innocent'' of what Ms. Cincinelli had accused him of and that she had ''set him up to gain an advantage in the divorce.'')  Then she met Mr. DiRubba.  Born in the Bronx and raised mostly in Westchester County, he was living in the section of Queens that local residents call Old Howard Beach. He was pleasant and talkative and mentioned having written a cookbook, according to a neighbor who expressed doubts about whether Mr. DiRubba had always been truthful.  The cookbook -- a collection of recipes from Italian-American actors titled ''Shut Up and Eat!'' -- is a point of pride with Mr. DiRubba. He also mentioned it in an interview during which he named several cast members of ''The Sopranos'' as friends. He said he had helped one of them, Tony Lip (who played the character Carmine Lupertazzi), write it. If so, his role is not acknowledged. (Mr. Lip died in 2013; his credited co-author, Steven Priggé, did not respond to a request for comment.)  Mr. DiRubba's other business interests included a New Jersey bagel shop as well as a bakery and a tattoo parlor in New York's Hudson Valley.  Steve Brescia, the mayor of Montgomery, N.Y., where the bakery was, recalled Mr. DiRubba as having a ''good line of bull.'' Mr. Lip appeared at the opening; Mr. DiRubba sold it after about a year.  A few years later, Mr. DiRubba teamed up with Chuck Zito, a former Hells Angels leader and celebrity bodyguard with a modest acting career, to open the tattoo parlor, in nearby Monroe, N.Y. Mr. Zito invested $100,000 in the business, TMZ reported.  Jim Purcell, Monroe's mayor at the time, said the tattoo parlor arrived with some fanfare but did not last long: ''All of a sudden, they were just gone.''  Mr. DiRubba offered few details about either business. (Contacted for comment, Mr. Zito declined. ''Not interested,'' he said via email.)  By 2017, Mr. DiRubba had settled in Queens and, he said, was making a living ''building and flipping houses.''  It did not take long for the romance that began with Ms. Cincinelli pulling over to chat to turn sour. From late 2017 to early 2018, court filings show, Mr. DiRubba sought a protective order and criminal charges against her, and she got a protective order against him.  Along the way, court filings show, she was disciplined by the Police Department amid accusations that she had shared confidential information with Mr. DiRubba. She was placed on modified duty and her gun was taken away. As with the murder-for-hire case, her lawyer said Mr. DiRubba had concocted the accusations to get back at Ms. Cincinelli.  Still, they continued to see each other and, according to Mr. DiRubba, Ms. Cincinelli remained fixated on keeping Mr. Carvalho away from her pension in the divorce.  As the divorce neared a resolution in January 2019, her talk turned especially dark, Mr. DiRubba said.  '''He's got to go,''' he recalled her saying of Mr. Carvalho. '''He can't show up in court.'''  Ms. Cincinelli was also resentful of Mr. DiRubba's teenage daughter and of the expensive things he bought her: Ugg boots, Louis Vuitton bags, Sephora makeup and ''fake nails every week,'' according to text messages cited by prosecutors.  When Ms. Cincinelli began to track the teenager via social media, Mr. DiRubba was alarmed. When she suggested having the girl killed, he decided to go to the F.B.I. It was February 2019.  Over the next several months, he recorded his conversations with Ms. Cincinelli, who he said was obsessed with true-crime television shows.  ''She used to watch all the crime stories,'' he recalled, mentioning the cases of Dalia Dippolito, a Florida woman convicted of trying to have her husband killed, and Amy Fisher, the Long Island teenager who shot the wife of her mechanic boyfriend, Joey Buttafuoco.  What happened on the morning of May 17, 2019, had the makings of its own true-crime drama.  A local detective went to Ms. Cincinelli's Long Island home to tell her the police were investigating Mr. Carvalho's death. Mr. DiRubba was also there, and a short time later, F.B.I. agents sent him a text message that was purportedly from the killer and included a picture of the supposed murder scene.  Mr. DiRubba showed Ms. Cincinelli the picture, and she told him they should align their alibis and delete the text exchanges from their phones.  But it was all a ruse: The authorities had staged the killing to catch Ms. Cincinelli.  In court filings, her lawyer offered a counternarrative, calling Mr. DiRubba an ''inveterate liar'' and a financial parasite who had stolen Ms. Cincinelli's jewelry and used her credit card without permission.  Yes, some of what Ms. Cincinelli could be heard saying on the recordings was ''troubling,'' the lawyer, James Kousouros wrote, but the recordings also made it ''palpably clear'' that she did not believe the scheme was real.  Mr. DiRubba went to the F.B.I., Mr. Kousouros wrote, because it fit his pattern: Use false accusations as a ''cudgel'' to force her to take him back when she tried to break up with him.  In the weeks before Mr. DiRubba contacted the authorities, Mr. Kousouros wrote, Ms. Cincinelli had kicked him out of her house in a dispute over money. He texted to say that he would pay her to sleep on her couch and that he was expecting a payoff from his bookie. She took him back with an ultimatum: Repay what he owed her or get out.  After Mr. DiRubba did not pay and she kicked him out, Mr. Kousouros wrote, he ''weaseled his way back into the house and began eliciting the statements made on the tapes.'' (Mr. DiRubba denied Mr. Kousouros's accusations and version of events.)  In court filings, Mr. Kousouros highlighted something else involving Mr. DiRubba that happened shortly before he informed on Ms. Cincinelli: He was charged with trying to steal a diamond ring from a jeweler.  While they were sitting in a parked car, according to court filings, Mr. DiRubba told the jeweler to leave the ring and get out. He told the jeweler he had a gun and was ''connected to Gotti people.''  The case was resolved with Mr. DiRubba pleading guilty to the equivalent of disorderly conduct. It has since been sealed.  ''There was no ring,'' he said. ''There was no diamond. That's all fake.''  That, in essence, was Ms. Cincinelli's defense. Her guilty plea amounted to an admission that she had destroyed evidence of a crime she insists she did not commit.  ''This resolution was arrived at after an extensive investigation and an exhaustive review of the discovery in the case,'' Mr. Kousouros said. ''That investigation revealed that this was the appropriate resolution.''  Prosecutors said they would seek a five-year prison term when Ms. Cincinelli, 36, is sentenced in October. She has been in a federal jail in Brooklyn since her arrest and she resigned from the Police Department last month. She will not receive a pension.  Of the plea deal, Mr. Carvalho's lawyer, Erica Sakol, said he had ''peace of mind that this matter is progressing toward its conclusion'' and believed Ms. Cincinelli had tried to hire a hit man and was ''fully capable'' of doing so in the future.  ''Not a day goes by that my client doesn't look over his shoulder,'' Ms. Sakol said.  ''No one's a winner,'' Mr. DiRubba said, reflecting on the outcome and adding that he was particularly concerned about the case's effect on his daughter and Ms. Cincinelli's children.  Asked how he was spending his time lately, he said that he was ''just laying low'' and that he'd had the ''Valerie'' tattoo inked over. He sounded rueful about where the relationship had led him.  ''I thought I was being her knight in shining armor coming to her rescue,'' he said. ''It was more like tin.''  Jonah E. Bromwich and Sean Piccoli contributed reporting. Alain Delaquérière and Sheelagh McNeill contributed research.  John DiRubba, at right in 2019, told the F.B.I. that his girlfriend, a New York City police officer, plotted to have him hire a hit man to kill her husband as well as Mr. DiRubba's teenage daughter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATTHEW MCDERMOTT/POLARIS) (MB1); Valerie Cincinelli, center, a former police officer, pleaded guilty this month to obstruction of justice. Prosecutors agreed to drop two murder-for-hire charges. Ms. Cincinelli has been held at a federal jail in Brooklyn since her arrest in 2019 and resigned from the Police Department last month. She will be sentenced in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HOWARD SCHNAPP FOR NEWSDAY) (MB5)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004q "
206		"    Living With the Specter of Gun Violence: 1 School, 5 Dead Students  By Rick Rojas  1,858 words 25 April 2021   18     KNOXVILLE, Tenn. -- The killings came in rapid succession.  On a cold night in late January, a high school football player was found unconscious and bleeding from a single gunshot wound. Two weeks later, a 16-year-old student was killed by what the authorities said may have been a stray bullet. Four days after that, a co-captain of the dance team was shot dead. In early March, a 15-year-old who last attended classes in the fall died from gunshot wounds.  And last week, Anthony J. Thompson Jr., 17, was shot and killed by a police officer in a brief scuffle inside a cramped bathroom on the same campus, becoming the fifth student at Austin-East Magnet High School this year to die of gun violence.  The shooting death of Mr. Thompson, who the authorities said fired a pistol and struck a trash can in the bathroom moments before he was killed, echoed a series of violent confrontations between African-Americans and law enforcement officers. But it also stirred an all-too familiar anguish in a community that residents said has been gripped in an epidemic of gun violence besieging its young people.  ''These kids are losing their lives left and right for no reason,'' said Kiara Taylor, 21, whose brother, Justin Taylor, the football player, was killed in what the authorities described as an accidental shooting. ''It makes it harder to get out of the house every day knowing another child has lost their life.''  In several of the shootings, teenagers as young as 14 have been arrested.  The authorities said the confrontation with Mr. Thompson escalated because he was armed. In shaky videos recorded by police officers' body cameras, the officers are seen reaching for their guns, with one opening fire. A classmate, pinned to the tile floor by another officer, sees the seeping blood and cries out: ''Help him! Please, help him!'' An autopsy showed Mr. Thompson was pierced in the heart and lungs by a single bullet.  The shooting, which prosecutors in Knoxville, Tenn., released video of this week after sustained community pressure, unfolded in the midst of the murder trial of Derek Chauvin, a former police officer convicted of killing George Floyd.  But in Knoxville, much of the community's outrage over the death was rooted in broader fears that a climate of violence has woven itself into the lives of its young people.  Knoxville, a city of lush hills situated along the Tennessee River with about 188,000 residents, recorded 37 homicides last year, one of the deadliest years in the city's modern history. The City Council recently approved a $1 million proposal to fund programs that intend to stem gun violence.  ''I think that this city is reeling,'' said Charme P. Allen, the Knox County district attorney general. ''I think that the fact we've had five deaths of high school students means that clearly somewhere something is wrong. It's unacceptable.''  At a recent community talent show, girls performed dances they learned from TikTok in T-shirts that memorialized one classmate. In protests, they sat on the hoods of their friends' cars, chanting ''Black youth matter'' and mouthing the lyrics to songs by the rapper Lil Baby, which blared from the speakers.  ''They're angry,'' Jacqueline Muhammad, whose daughter Janaria Muhammad, 15, was the co-captain of the school's dance team, said of her daughter's friends and classmates. ''They're hurt. They're tired. And I hope and pray that no one else has to get hurt.''  Austin-East, an arts magnet school with about 640 students, a majority of whom are Black, has been a reflection of the East Knoxville community's pride -- but also of its struggles. The streets surrounding the school are dotted with overgrown lots and abandoned storefronts, evidence, residents say, of neglect and the entrenched poverty pervading the neighborhood.  The school draws its students mostly from those East Knoxville neighborhoods, and residents describe it as an anchor for the community. Students and parents like to boast about the dance and arts programs.  But they also complain of outdated textbooks and a shortage of counselors. And in a community that has seen an uptick in crime in recent years, Ms. Muhammad said students were acquainted with deadly violence well before the recent fatal shootings.  Knox County Schools declined to comment on the shootings, but officials said that counseling and other services were available.  The anger and sorrow in the community built up as the killings continued. Justin Taylor was killed on Jan. 27 after the police found him in a car at a ministry center with a gunshot wound; a 17-year-old boy has been charged with criminally negligent homicide in his death.  Then, Stanley Freeman Jr., 16, was fatally shot in his car on Feb. 12 as he was driving home, the police said. A 14-year-old boy and a 16-year-old boy face first-degree murder charges, officials said.  Four days later, Janaria Muhammad was found unconscious with a gunshot wound. Jamarion Gillette, who officials said had not been to school since September, was fatally shot on March 9.  Mr. Thompson's death -- the only one that involved a confrontation with the police -- has tapped into the broader tensions that have been inflamed in recent weeks as the nation watched the trial of Mr. Chauvin. It also came amid an uproar in Chicago over the release of body-camera footage showing the shooting of Adam Toledo, a 13-year-old who tossed a handgun behind a fence before he was killed by a police officer.  It happened, too, days before the shooting deaths of other young people across the country, including Ma'Khia Bryant, 16, who was wielding a knife when she was killed by a police officer in Columbus, Ohio, and the fatal attack on a 7-year-old girl who was shot inside a car in a drive-through lane at a McDonald's restaurant in Chicago.  Ms. Allen, the Knoxville prosecutor, had initially resisted calls by activists, local elected officials and even the chief of the Knoxville Police Department to release body-camera footage of Mr. Thompson's shooting.  But in a news conference that stretched over two hours on Wednesday, Ms. Allen used 911 calls, text messages and footage from school security and body cameras to recount both the shooting and what had precipitated it. She would not pursue criminal charges against the officer, she said, citing what she described as his reasonable fear of lethal danger to himself and the other officers.  She said the police were first called after fights between Mr. Thompson and his girlfriend. The girl's mother, Regina Perkins, told the police that Mr. Thompson had pushed her daughter and pulled her hair.  In an interview with The Knoxville News Sentinel, Ms. Perkins said that she regretted calling the police. ''I am so sorry, and I never meant for anything to happen to him,'' she said. ''He was a good kid, he had dreams and goals, but he had some struggles.''  Mr. Thompson was captured by school security cameras walking around the campus and talking on his cellphone before he went into the bathroom. After the officers arrived, a school resource officer led them there. Ms. Allen slowed down the body camera footage and pointed out a gun in the pocket of Mr. Thompson's hoodie. She later noted a hole in the fabric that she said came from firing his gun.  Knoxville's mayor, Indya Kincannon, said in a statement on Wednesday that she was ''relieved'' the footage had been shared. ''This information, while imperative for transparency, is not easy to watch,'' she said.  But lawyers representing Mr. Thompson's family argued that his death could have been avoided.  ''When a suspect is a person of color, there is no attempt to de-escalate the situation,'' Ben Crump, the prominent civil rights lawyer who has been hired by many families of people killed by the police, including the Floyd family, said in a statement after he was retained by Mr. Thompson's family. ''Police shoot first and ask questions later, time after time, because Black lives are afforded less value.''  Over the last week, Mr. Thompson's name has been added to a list displayed on posters and chanted in demonstrations, a collection of young people killed by gunfire. Dozens gathered recently in a park down the street from Austin-East, and families shared stories of the relatives they had lost.  Ms. Taylor, Justin Taylor's older sister, called her brother an ''entrepreneur'' who regularly woke up early to mow lawns for money. ''He was very ambitious,'' she said. ''It's very important to me that that lives on, that people know that about him, that people know he was a good student. Austin-East is not full of bad kids.''  The group took a meandering path through East Knoxville, carrying banners and wearing shirts commemorating those who had been killed. They passed homes with signs declaring school pride. ''Pray for A.E. to be strong,'' one said.  Sheenan Lundy, 36, burst out into school songs, with a chorus of voices joining her. I'm so glad I go to A.E. I'm so, so glad I go to A.E.  ''Austin-East gives hope,'' she said later. ''It's family oriented. It's home. It's love. It's dedication. It's pride. I could go on and on. It's a special place. It's a safe haven -- no matter what they say about it.''  It had been that for her, a graduate in the Class of 2003. Ms. Lundy could see it becoming the same for her daughter, Shaniya Cherry, a 15-year-old ninth grader in the dance program who was recently elected Miss Freshman.  ''I still love my school,'' she said, adding that she and her friends have relied on one another in recent months as they have navigated their pain.  Her younger sister, Aniya Mitchell, 9, piped up. She said she'd heard her older sister asking their mother about the police officers at school. Aniya, who shared a father with Janaria Muhammad, started to cry as she described her fear of encountering someone with a gun. ''You don't want that to happen to you,'' she said.  Shaniya reached down and wiped the tears from her sister's face.  Richard Fausset contributed reporting.  Richard Fausset contributed reporting.  A youth rally was held this month in Knoxville, Tenn., to honor five students from Austin-East Magnet High School who have been killed this year. Anyia Mitchell, 9, lost her sister Janaria Muhammad, 15, whose father, Lawrence Muhammad, also marched. One shirt showed Janaria with Jamarion Gillette, who was shot a month after she was. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA TEZAK FOR THE new_york_times); A memorial for Anthony Thompson Jr., who died this month, in front of Austin-East Magnet High School. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL YOUNG/THE KNOXVILLE NEWS SENTINEL, VIA IMAGN)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004p "
207		"   TIMES INSIDER  Finding Black History in Comics  By Lauren Messman  859 words 25 April 2021   2     A yearlong Narrative Projects series offers a fresh perspective on Black history, looking beyond the familiar lessons you may have learned in school.  Times Insider explains who we are and what we do and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.  Before the office emptied and Times journalists retreated to their homes with their laptops, Veronica Chambers, editor of The new_york_times's Narrative Projects team, often found herself bumping into George Gene Gustines to chat about comics, a topic he has covered for The Times since 2002.  ''There's a fair number of comic book fans in the office,'' Mr. Gustines said, ''but she's definitely passionate.''  It was that same zeal for the characters and story lines in the pages of Marvel, DC Comics and other publishers that inspired the latest package of stories for Black History, Continued, a yearlong Narrative Projects series that is examining pivotal moments and transformative figures in Black culture.  The package tracks the complex history of Black characters in comic books and their evolution in the hands of diverse creators, beyond the mainstream success of films like ''Black Panther'' and ''Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse.'' It further explores what their powers and personal struggles can tell us about the multiplicity of Black experiences.  In the articles, the writers look at how Marvel's Falcon and his hesitancy to take over as Captain America can offer insight into the complexity and pressures of American identityAs a teenage girl from a hyper-policed community in Chicago, Riri Williams brings a humanity to her missions as Ironheart that challenges traditional notions of what crime-fighting and bravery can be.  ''Superheroes gave us an opportunity to look at this thing that will keep coming back through the year, which is, what is a Black hero and what do heroes mean in Black history?'' Ms. Chambers said.  The series Black History, Continued, which began in January, examines how that history ''touches sports and politics and business and fashion and fine art and music and everything else,'' Ms. Chambers said. The series has revisited the work of Augusta Savage, a Harlem Renaissance sculptor, told the origins of Black History Month with an illustrated timeline and featured an essay by the scholar Imani Perry that posits whether we ask too much of Black luminaries.  Once a topic is decided on, the visual editor Marcelle Hopkins and the photo editor Amanda Webster collaborate to give the story a unique visual treatment.  ''We're aiming to explore the depth and breadth of the Black experience with images that aren't often seen in the Black history lessons we were taught in school,'' Ms. Hopkins said. By telling these stories with archival video, illustrations, 3-D modeling or virtual events, she added, ''these narratives feel current and relevant to our lives today.''  The superhero package, which was published online Friday and appears in Sunday's Arts & Leisure print section, features four stories, including an introduction by Ms. Chambers that imagines Blackness as a superpower. It touches on the rumor that Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. served as the inspiration for Magneto and Professor X in the X-Men comics, the ''Harriet Tubman: Demon Slayer'' books and Allison Hargreeves's civil rights story arc in the second season of Netflix's ''The Umbrella Academy.''  The package also includes an article by Mr. Gustines about the possibility of a new Black Superman film, and essays by the critic and comic book writer Evan Narcisse and the sociologist Eve Ewing, in which they discuss the politics of scripting superhero stories as Black creators.  The writers Ms. Chambers recruited represent her larger goal for Black History, Continued, which is to tap both talent from within The Times and visionary voices outside it. She said she was also interested in engaging with the topics covered in the series off the page, by way of virtual and live events.  The first Black History, Continued event, which is tied to the superhero story package, was prerecorded and will stream on YouTube on April 27. (Readers interested in tuning in are encouraged to R.S.V.P. online). It features a reading by the poet Nikki Giovanni and a conversation between the Times correspondent John Eligon and young activists. Ms. Chambers also hosts a panel discussion with the writer N.K. Jemisin, the illustrator Peter Ramsey and the singer Estelle about how creators learn to dream.  ''All three of them talked about what it means to be a Black creative and how long and hard the road is,'' said Ms. Chambers. ''You get this incredible success and creativity, but also the realness of the challenges of trying to do what they do as Black people.''  As for what readers can expect from the series as the year goes on, ''future topics include literature, sports, politics,'' Ms. Chambers said, adding, ''We'd love to hear what people want to read more about.''  ''The Falcon and the Winter Soldier'' touches on issues about race and American identity. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHUCK ZLOTNICK/MARVEL STUDIOS)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004o "
208		"   CORNER OFFICE Money and U Racial Justice and Corporate Responsibility  By David Gelles  1,567 words 25 April 2021   3     Derrick Johnson, the president and chief executive of the N.A.A.C.P., was on the phone with other civil rights leaders on Tuesday afternoon, discussing strategy for how to respond to different possible outcomes in the trial of Derek Chauvin, the police officer charged with murdering George Floyd.  But before they could finish, news came that the jury in Minnesota had reached a verdict. Mr. Johnson and the others dropped off the call and waited. An hour later, the judge pronounced Mr. Chauvin guilty on the three charges he faced, including second-degree murder.  ''When it got to the third guilty, I had a sigh of relief,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''Because if the verdict would have happened differently, the energy could have been harsh.''  Mr. Johnson finds himself at the helm of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the country's foremost civil rights organization, when the nation is gripped by the most intense and sustained reckoning over racial justice in generations. It is a role that requires a versatile skill set. He sued President Donald J. Trump in 2017 over the fate of the Dreamers, and again this year over the Capitol riot. He has walked the streets with protesters in Minneapolis and, before President Biden was inaugurated, pressed him to create a civil rights envoy in the West Wing.  At the same time, Mr. Johnson has struck a balancing act with the business world -- welcoming its expressions of solidarity and pledges to create more diverse workplaces, while calling it out on unfulfilled promises and empty rhetoric.  ''We intend to hold all corporations who have made commitments to the fight for social justice accountable,'' he posted on Twitter last month. ''Our communities, lives, and democracy are at stake.''  Born in Detroit, Mr. Johnson went to college in Jackson, Miss., where he still lives. After law school, he forged a career as a professional activist, working his way up from Mississippi state president of the N.A.A.C.P. to the organization's top job in 2017.  As the business world gets more involved in social and political issues -- including voting rights, immigration and climate change -- Mr. Johnson is looking to companies to help advance positive social change.  ''There is a responsibility of corporations to ensure that we maintain a stable democracy,'' he said.  This interview was condensed and edited for clarity.  President Biden talked about the potential for the guilty verdict to be a moment of significant change for this nation. What do you think needs to happen for that to become a reality?  It was an important moment for this nation. If we do this right, this can be our Selma, Ala., moment. We need to create a new standard of community and police relationships to allow for good cops to be valued and appreciated, and to weed out and hold accountable bad cops and bad actors, and not allow for these incidents to keep repeating. That is really important, and it only happens if you get strong federal policy.  How do you think about the role of corporations in these efforts?  Corporations have a critical role to play. They have to step up their engagement to do away with the caste system that we live in, because far too many of them have participated in the status quo of racial inequities. Many of them have maintained their profit margin based on it. But we are at this point in this nation where it is not good business practice for corporations not to step up, not to engage.  Corporations have to use their muscle and choices to expand and protect our access to voting. Many of these corporations exercise vast muscle to pass policies that benefit their bottom line. We should also be looking at the bottom line of protecting our democracy, expanding and protecting access to voting, and to maintain a standard of policing. The world is watching.  What specific changes do you think would make a difference?  Three things. The one there has to be is honest view of the data. If a corporation's market share growth is much more diverse than their marketing spend, there needs to be an adjustment.  Second, the decision makers need to reflect the growth of the customer base, so that there is diversity on the boards, and the C-suite becomes more diverse. Because a lot of mistakes are being made as a result of people who are not at the table not being able to assist in decisions that are culturally sensitive.  And third, there has to be more diversity in procurement and other opportunities for entrepreneurs, and better pay. Henry Ford, with all of the things he had wrong, one thing he had right was making sure his workers were paid so that they can purchase Model-T cars, so that he could sell more cars.  It is a business imperative to be engaged in creating a just and equitable society. It is not charity.  Do you think that the promises corporations made last year to diversify their work forces and the money they pledged to support organizations working for racial justice made an impact?  It is a step in the right direction. But you can't address the structural racism that has existed in this country for 400 years with a few checks. It has to be a sustained investment, so that we can create a society that's more equitable and we can actually advance business opportunity. Because the two things are not in conflict with one another.  This nation has always been diverse, but it's becoming even more diverse. We are in a global economy, and we need all of our brain power, and there are markets right here in this nation that need to be tapped. If we continue to have these types of unfortunate incidents [like police killings], and the resulting outcome, that is not creating a stable business climate.  Do you welcome these statements of solidarity from C.E.O.s, or are there instances where you feel like it would be better for executives to not necessarily feel the need to weigh in at a moment like this?  The statements are fine, but it's the commitment and the longevity of the commitment that's most important. So when the controversy happens, the question for us is always: Are you willing to be a part of the solution? You cannot have a lender making a lofty statement and practicing predatory behaviors, targeting the same communities.  What was it like for you growing up?  I was born and raised in Detroit, Mich., and most of my formative years were in the '80s, so I was able to witness in that community the impact of several realities. Detroit was a boomtown for the auto industry, but in my neighborhood, we began to see the impact of the plant closings. I also witnessed the level of violence committed toward the Asian community, because many workers blamed the Asian community for the crash of the auto industry. That was primarily because people were feeding that flame of tribalism and racial hatred.  You had a lot of people who were gainfully employed in the auto industry, and then there was huge unemployment as a result of factories shutting down or cutting back on production. I was able to witness firsthand the mental health effects that had on families, particularly with the growth in the drug culture. In my neighborhood, we talk about the era before crack and the era post-crack. Families were destroyed, and a lot of these families were hardworking individuals who were laid off and they were caught up in that cycle.  When I finally got a car, there was one week I was pulled over every day for seven days straight. I had just finished my first year of college.  Do you feel like the companies speaking out against the new restrictive voting laws are having an impact?  Well, I want to see the outcome. Corporations must show up in ways in which they are able to influence public policy. This should be a priority issue. There is no reason that members of Georgia's legislature or the governor should be able to limit access to voting and still have an expectation of support from the corporate community that is doing business in Georgia.  We are confronting the same reality in Texas, where you have some of the largest corporations headquartered in Texas, whether AT&T or American Airlines. They have political muscle to influence public policy. If individual policymakers who are relying on corporate support are unable to see the importance of access to voting, corporations shouldn't support those individuals, because those individuals are suffocating the voices of their consumers.  It's been an intense five years for you and the organization. What's been your takeaway?  I think the past four years under the previous administration was a wake-up call for the nation. The level of racial hatred, anti-Semitic, xenophobic, tribalistic language that was coming from the prior administration could have ripped this nation apart. Now it is time for us to work as hard, as focused, as possible to repair those rifts.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM WIDMER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004n "
209		"   Defying a Shock to the System  By Amanda M. Fairbanks  2,849 words 25 April 2021   1     To shake up the tedium of quarantine, I started doing polar plunges with Stephanie Reece, who was driven by something else entirely.  By January, we were 10 months into the pandemic and I couldn't remember the last time I had left Long Island. My husband and I were raising two young children and working, cleaning and cooking, indefinitely, from home. It was hard to imagine a time when I had felt more claustrophobic.  But one frigid morning, when I was bundled up in a knee-length parka, walking the dog on the beach, it dawned on me that the sliver of a peninsula I lived on -- surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the south and the Long Island Sound to the north -- offered an escape. What if I could muster the courage to leave the dry land and take a plunge? Would the shock to my system shake me out of this quarantine malaise?  There are several groups of dedicated cold-water swimmers on the East End, but I wanted a beginner -- ideally, another woman -- to accompany me. A local fitness instructor and cold-water enthusiast soon introduced me to Stephanie Reece.  Unbeknown to me, Ms. Reece and I had recently crossed paths. Last December, as the only two women in an outdoor exercise class, we made small talk as we stretched. She was a woman of few words, mostly choosing to keep her focus inward.  ''So, do you have kids?'' I asked her.  ''Well, I used to,'' she said.  A few weeks later, we ''swam'' together for the first time at Long Beach in Sag Harbor. While I shrieked and shouted expletives as soon as my feet touched the icy water, Ms. Reece glided into the bay, seemingly unfazed. Dressed in only our swimsuits, we lasted for two minutes, the water -- a balmy 42 degrees -- up to our chins. As the weeks passed, two minutes turned to three, and five minutes became seven. And as January became February and February became March, the temperature of the water kept dropping. Soon, others joined us.  Winter plunges, from start to finish, are an act of defiance. Stepping into the cold water is a shock to your system. One tip, which I often resist, is to submerge your shoulders beneath the water as quickly as possible. After about 30 seconds, your breath slowly returns to an even cadence. Your extremities start to tingle. You feel your heart beating outside your chest. And just like that, it's over. Dopamine and serotonin flood your nervous system.  Afterward, standing beneath a steaming hot shower feels like salvation itself. But the real magic comes later on: It turns out that doing a resilient thing makes you feel more resilient.  The benefits of cold-water therapy include not only a possible reduction in muscle soreness and inflammation, but recent research suggests that it may help lessen feelings of anxiety and depression. In Britain, a mental health initiative run by the National Health Service is conducting a clinical trial on the effect of twice-weekly sea swims on mood and well-being.  But this isn't your typical feature story about privileged white women doing polar plunges to free ourselves because Gwyneth Paltrow told us to try it. This is a survival story. It's about how Ms. Reece, my first cold-water partner and a former professional athlete, is working through an unthinkable tragedy the only way she knows how. As our weekly meet-ups continued, I slowly learned more about her.  Ms. Reece is a former professional tennis player who has competed at the Australian Open, the French Open, the U.S. Open and Wimbledon. At the peak of her career, she ranked 79th in the world in doubles tennis. At Indiana University, her alma mater, she is one of four female tennis players inducted into its Athletics Hall of Fame.  Growing up on the North Side of Indianapolis, Ms. Reece met her future husband, Michael Hunn, during high school. Though they briefly dated as teenagers and their sisters were close friends, it wasn't until their late 20s that a full-fledged relationship began. Friends were pairing off and starting to have children, and after dating for five months, the two became engaged. The couple exchanged vows in 2000 and next relocated to Manhattan, where Mr. Hunn worked in sales for American Express. After living for a time in Westchester County, they eventually put down roots in East Hampton, where Ms. Reece had not only family nearby but also a job that she loved, working as a pro at a local tennis center.  From 2003 to 2009, they called the East Hampton area home. They had two blonde, blue-eyed children -- Harrison and Shelby, born two years apart. But following a series of failed entrepreneurial ventures, the couple declared bankruptcy in the aftermath of the 2008 financial collapse and returned to a town in Indiana, Zionsville.  The marriage didn't last. In 2017, the couple divorced, largely because of Mr. Hunn's increasing alcoholism and financial instability, Ms. Reece said. While they parted on amicable terms, sharing custody of the children, Ms. Reece took Mr. Hunn to court after he fell behind on child support, and his drinking remained a constant source of worry. A court document from December 2017, a month after their divorce became final, showed that Mr. Hunn had already violated the agreement that he wouldn't drink when he had the children. By April 2018, Ms. Reece had requested that on the days when he had primary custody, a device regularly measure his blood-alcohol levels.  On Friday morning, Sept. 21, 2018, Ms. Reece was driving when she received a call from an administrator at Zionsville Middle School. Her daughter, Shelby, hadn't shown up for classes that morning, and neither parent had called in her absence. A quick call to the high school revealed that her son, Harrison, hadn't shown up either.  Ms. Reece immediately texted her children. When they didn't respond, she drove over to their father's house. Strangely, the shades to their bedrooms were still drawn. The ''Find My iPhone'' tracking feature showed that both phones were right there, inside the home.  Although Ms. Reece knew where an extra key was, she instinctively knew better than to go in, so she called 911 and, a bit later, her brother, to wait with her on a patch of grass across from the house. ''As a mother, my brain was protecting me,'' she said.  A squad of deputies from the Boone County Sheriff's Department arrived and eventually broke down the front door.  Inside, they found Harrison, 15, Shelby, 13, and Mr. Hunn, 50, all dead. The police believed that the children had been sleeping when their father shot them, placing pillows over their faces first. He then turned the gun on himself.  About an hour went by before an officer broke the news to Ms. Reece. ''It was so surreal,'' she said, reflecting on the precise moment when her world, as she had known it, came crashing down. ''As a mother, it's unimaginable,'' she said. ''We want to make sense of the senseless. But there's no reason. There's no excuse ever.''  An autopsy later showed trace amounts of alcohol in Mr. Hunn's blood. As for the handgun, Mr. Hunn would go target shooting from time to time and kept one or two guns in a locked cabinet. The police report, which Ms. Reece eventually forced herself to read, revealed that investigators had found a pile of pillows in the garage pierced through with bullet holes. It appeared that Mr. Hunn, who left a suicide note behind, had been practicing for the tragedy he would inflict on his family.  A week later, more than 3,000 Zionsville residents crowded into Traders Point Christian Church, where the family had worshiped for nearly a decade, for a celebration of Harrison and Shelby's lives. Two Sundays before, Ms. Reece and her children had sat in those same pews.  ''When they call me, I know it's bad,'' said Rachel L. Hall, a licensed mental health counselor who specializes in grief and trauma, and who raced to the scene of the crime on Sept. 21.  Ms. Hall, 45, works part time throughout Indiana as a consultant to law enforcement agencies. She's also a full-time clinician. That day her assignment was to help emergency medical workers process the horror they had just seen. A chaplain who stayed tethered to Ms. Reece that day later suggested that she reach out to Ms. Hall when she was ready.  Three weeks after the killings, Ms. Hall received a call from Ms. Reece. It was, she said, the ''freshest grief'' she had helped a client process. For nearly two years, the women talked once a week. ''What actually helps people is the acknowledgment of their pain,'' Ms. Hall said of their sessions together. ''You don't need to fix it. You just need to listen.'' Ms. Hall added that Ms. Reece's case probably affected her the most intensely out of any in her career as a counselor. ''Stephanie is an absolute testament to human resilience.''  A 2014 study in the journal Forensic Science International examined more than 30 years of data on filicide, the act of a parent killing a child. Filicide happens about 500 times every year in the United States, with fathers and mothers equally likely to murder their offspring. While the motivations behind filicide are complex, Ms. Reece believes it most likely involves a desire for spousal revenge.  In ''Filicide in the United States,'' a 2016 article in the Indian Journal of Psychiatry, Phillip J. Resnick, a forensic psychiatrist, broke down the crime by gender: ''Men, as opposed to women, who kill their children are more likely to kill older children, are more likely to be unemployed, and are more likely to be facing separation from their spouse, and are more likely to abuse alcohol or drugs.''  For residents of Zionsville, a small town about a 25-minute drive from Indianapolis, the tragedy became their version of the 1999 Columbine High School massacre. Nearly everyone in the close-knit community knew someone who had been personally affected: emergency medical workers, friends, teachers, classmates, teammates, the children who had Shelby as a babysitter.  For Ms. Reece, everywhere she went, she was the high school tennis coach whose ex-husband had murdered their children and then killed himself. Living under the glare of a microscope simply became too much. So, last August, she packed a U-Haul, drove for 15 hours and touched down in East Hampton.  Ms. Reece, now 51, had a very specific reason for returning to the East End: her aunt Dale. The women have long shared a deep, almost mother-daughter, connection.  Dale Leff, 73, welcomed her niece into her home. Together, they have begun the uncharted process of finding a way forward. They have also been each other's company during the pandemic -- whether sharing a meal in the evenings, binge-watching ''The Durrells'' on PBS or taking winter walks on the beach with their dogs.  The 21st of every month, as well as birthdays and holidays, are always painful. Some mornings, Ms. Reece wanders into her aunt's bedroom for a hug. Other evenings, just knowing that someone else is in the house helps lessen Ms. Reece's anxiety.  ''We both need each other,'' said Ms. Leff, who teaches etiquette to children, in addition to serving on the boards of several local nonprofits. ''This is my purpose in life, to be here for her.''  Both women often wear blue-beaded bracelets with the letters ''H'' and ''S.'' Ms. Leff wears two heart-shaped necklaces made of lapis lazuli, in addition to a matching pair of earrings to symbolize her great-niece and great-nephew. Ms. Reece has small tattoos on her torso to commemorate her children: On her left side are two interlocking hearts with their initials; on her right side is a small fish that Harrison had drawn next to a small turtle that Shelby had illustrated.  At a statuesque 5 feet 11 inches, Ms. Reece not only has the body of an elite athlete, but the endurance and willfulness of one. Her lifelong athleticism, her aunt thinks, has made all the difference in her continuing recovery.  ''Athletes don't give up,'' said Ms. Reece who, during the course of our interviews, was always rather stoic and succinct.  As a girl, when she was first learning tennis and starting to compete, her work ethic helped make up for whatever she lacked in natural ability. In August, she returned to the gig she had years earlier at East Hampton Indoor Tennis, where she works as a tennis pro six days a week. Eventually, she would like to save up for a small house to call her own.  The sport -- and the familiarity of the 78-foot rectangular clay court -- has been her saving grace. Ms. Reece is not only a creature of habit and routine, but also loves the repetition and endless strategy of the game. Her early-morning lessons ensure that she gets out of bed, even when she'd rather pull the covers over her head. On her hardest days, she knows the endorphins will start kicking in after a few minutes of hitting the balls back and forth across the net. The Zen, the rhythm of tennis, helps quiet her racing mind.  Scott Rubenstein, 61, the managing partner of East Hampton Indoor Tennis, has known Ms. Reece since 2001. ''Stephanie is one of the purest, nicest, brightest women that I've ever met,'' he said. ''She's also not a quitter.''  For Ms. Reece, it's helpful to have a boss who not only knows her traumatic back story but who also knew Harrison and Shelby. ''They were outgoing, friendly, just wonderful, beautiful children,'' Mr. Rubenstein said. He shared that she had recently confided that she would always have a giant hole in her heart.  ''You don't move on. You don't get over it,'' Ms. Reece said. ''I'm relearning how to live.''  Grief is like wading in an endless ocean. She never knows when, exactly, the next wave will come and pull her down. Whether in Zionsville or East Hampton, the reminders of what she lost follow her. The triggers often surface at the most unexpected times.  In February, while grocery shopping, Ms. Reece looked down at her cart -- carrots, hummus, spinach, avocados -- and realized it no longer contained Cheerios, Eggo waffles, peanut butter and jelly, bananas for Harrison, blueberries for Shelby.  She abandoned the cart and raced back to her car, where she sat inside and wept.  Lately, Ms. Leff sees the cold water as but another step forward in Ms. Reece's healing process. Like tennis, it's an activity where Ms. Reece can push past her limitations. ''That drive to keep going is what has helped with her grief,'' Ms. Leff said. ''She will never get over the loss of her children, but she will learn to live with it.''  During our Tuesday morning plunges, Ms. Reece is always the first one in the water.  In early March, 17-mile-per-hour winds made the bay look like the ocean. The temperature of the water was 37 degrees. It was our coldest, windiest plunge yet. A white layer of snow covered the pebble-strewn shore. A deer, standing perfectly still, kept watch.  We waded into the water. Around the three-minute mark, I gave up. The cold felt intolerable. Meanwhile, Ms. Reece stayed out, bobbing and weaving between the waves, her head bowed, her eyes sealed shut and her arms wrapped tightly around her torso. As is often the case, she didn't say a word.  Amanda M. Fairbanks is a journalist based in Sag Harbor, N.Y. Her first book, ''The Lost Boys of Montauk: The True Story of the Wind Blown, Four Men Who Vanished at Sea, and the Survivors They Left Behind,'' will be published next month by Gallery Books.  The author's cold-water meet-up in East Hampton, N.Y., on March 2. For one woman, the polar plunge is part of her survival story. Below, Stephanie Reece's night stand has photos of her children, Harrison, left, and Shelby. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LORI HAWKINS) (MB1); Stephanie Reece, above, moved back to East Hampton after unspeakable tragedy. ''You don't move on; you don't get over it,'' she said. ''I'm relearning how to live.'' Ms. Reece, a former professional tennis player, works as a pro at East Hampton Indoor Tennis, top. She and her aunt Dale Leff, above left, have a deep connection. ''This is my purpose in life, to be here for her,'' Ms. Leff said. Below, Ms. Reece is flanked by Shelby, left, and Harrison the summer before they were killed. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LORI HAWKINS; STEPHANIE REECE) (MB6)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004m "
210		"    Though Competition Is Stiff, You Can Win a Bidding War  By Vivian Marino  1,603 words 25 April 2021   6     Here are some tips on navigating today's supercharged real estate market, where inventory is low and other buyers can be cutthroat.  Bidding wars are becoming more commonplace in many suburban markets this spring as home buyers face stiffer competition for a tight supply of inventory.  ''We're seeing houses with 20 or 30 offers on it,'' said Andy Sachs, an agent for Keller Williams in Newtown, Conn., ''and prices going for $50,000 to $100,000, or more, over asking.''  Buyers can easily get caught up in the multiple-offer frenzy. ''They see a house and start imagining their lives there, with all their furnishings and their kids,'' said Dana Schwern, who works at Compass in Montclair, N.J. ''It can get very emotional.''  But she and other agents say it's best to push emotions aside, regardless of how difficult that might seem. To succeed in a bidding war you'll need to begin the home search with a fully equipped arsenal. This usually means having your finances in order, researching target neighborhoods, and selecting experienced professionals well ahead of time to help move a deal along, from bankers and real estate brokers to lawyers and engineers.  ''You'll want to decide what is the maximum comfortable number you'll pay for a house,'' Mr. Sachs said, ''and that doesn't necessarily mean what a bank will approve for you.''  A willingness to compromise is also key. ''The bottom line is right now sellers have the option of asking for the world,'' said Caroline Gosselin, an agent for Sotheby's International Realty in Short Hills, N.J., ''and they get it.''  Here are some ways to come out ahead.  Get Preapproval  One of the first and most important steps is getting preapproved for a mortgage. This shows the seller that you're not only a serious buyer, but a qualified one. And it will also allow you to act swiftly in this competitive market.  ''You have to make a snap decision in some cases, and if you have preapproval in advance, that gives you the ability to do that,'' said Ryan Barry, a senior loan consultant for the N.J. Lenders Corporation in Fairfield, N.J.  Mr. Barry noted, too, that real estate agents are often reluctant to entertain an offer without a preapproval letter in hand -- unless, of course, the buyer is offering all cash. (Also, many agents say they prefer to work with lenders who are familiar with a local market.)  A preapproval should not be confused with the less rigorous prequalification, which provides a quick estimate of what you might be able to afford, usually based on unverified financial information you provide.  In a preapproval, lenders will thoroughly review your income, assets and credit scores to determine exactly how much you can borrow and which loan might be best suited for you. This can take from a few hours to a few days to complete. ''You'll need to provide two months of bank statements, two pay stubs and two years of tax returns,'' said Mark Yecies, an owner of SunQuest Funding in Cranford, N.J.  Both Mr. Barry and Mr. Yecies say they provide approval letters for each property a buyer makes an offer on.  Waive Contingencies  Contingency clauses allow buyers to back out of a contract if certain conditions aren't met. But many sellers see them as road blocks to a sale, and these days they're far more likely to accept an offer with fewer contingencies or none at all.  The most common is the mortgage contingency, which lets you pull out of a deal if you can't secure financing for the property. Waiving this, said Angela Dooley, an agent with Compass on Long Island's North Shore, ''could put you in first or second place in a bidding war.'' But not everyone should do this. ''Only those people who are very, very confident they're going to get a mortgage,'' she said.  Among some of the other contingencies, a contract could be terminated if a home's appraised value comes in less than the amount you offered, if an inspection uncovers certain repair issues, or you're unable to sell your current home.  ''A very strong offer will waive all of them,'' Ms. Gosselin said, ''but there will be things you cannot do and that will be OK. For instance, you may not be able to waive the appraisal clause because you don't have the money to make up the difference,'' if an appraisal comes in lower than the sale price.  Ms. Gosselin and other agents say it's also becoming more common right now to limit the seller's responsibilities for inspection-related repairs to just major structural, mechanical and environmental issues. ''Most people are waiving the right to ask for small things,'' she said.  Chrissy D'Aleo Fels, 38, and Adam Fels, 39, who beat out 18 bidders last year for a move-in-ready, four-bedroom Victorian in Upper Montclair, agreed to cover the first $5,000 in repairs noted in the inspection, among other concessions. Their local lender also waived the appraisal altogether.  ''He knows that sales prices in the area are way above what homes would be appraised at,'' said Ms. Fels, who works as an arts administrator and cultural engagement director at Montclair State University. Mr. Fels is a senior vice president for marketing at Epicured, a meal delivery service. The couple paid about 25 percent over the asking price.  Be Quick and Flexible  Homes are selling at a fast clip in many markets -- usually within days, sometimes hours -- so if you see something that meets your criteria that you think you can afford, don't wait to submit a competitive bid.  Have your mortgage preapproval letter in hand, too, along with an experienced real estate lawyer lined up to review the sales contract, and an engineer for an inspection.  ''If you show a seller you are ready, that is very appealing,'' Ms. Dooley said.  Buyers should also be flexible when it comes to closing and move-in dates. ''You're trying to create a path with as little speed bumps as possible,'' Mr. Sachs added.  John Bruno, 29, and his wife, Mirza Dolmo-Bruno, 30, renters from the Bronx, wasted no time in bidding on a two-bedroom condominium in Maplewood, N.J. ''As soon as it came on the market, we asked to see it,'' said Mr. Bruno, a private investigator. And after their bid ($10,000 over the asking price) was accepted over other buyers last month, they agreed to a quick closing in late April. ''We didn't have a home to sell, so we were ready to go,'' he said.  Not all sellers are in a rush, though. Nancy Chu, an agent with Keller Williams Realty in Montclair, noted that some purchasers were allowing sellers to stay in their homes within 60 days after closing by renting it back to them for next to nothing. ''They're offering dollar-a-day occupancy,'' she said, ''and sellers are really taking advantage of it.''  One more thing to keep in mind: Just because another buyer was chosen over you doesn't necessarily mean all is lost. Some transactions ultimately fall through for various reasons, so if you have a strong enough bid and you're ready to act soon, you may be next on the seller's list.  Offer All Cash  Most people, of course, won't have the financial means to do this. But if you do have the cash available -- say you just sold a home and are now downsizing from a more expensive market -- this strategy will almost certainly put you at the front of the crowd.  ''Buyers moving to the suburbs from the city may have pockets of cash available after selling their place there,'' Ms. Schwern said. She added that all-cash buyers must be prepared to show proof of their available funds.  A recent survey by the online brokerage firm Redfin found that buyers who offered all cash almost quadrupled their chances of winning a bidding war, based on an analysis of offers from its clients between July 2020 and February 2021.  Other Tactics  Buyers can add an escalation clause, also known as an escalator, to their purchase offer. This allows them to increase their bid incrementally, up to a capped amount, should a higher, competing offer surface. But not all real estate agents will accept them, preferring individual offers instead.  And then there are the so-called love letters that buyers write to sellers hoping to sway their decision in choosing an offer. Some will include photographs of the buyer's family. The National Association of Realtors discourages such letters, maintaining they ''raise fair housing concerns, and could open real estate professionals and their clients to fair housing violations.'' But agents say that many buyers are still eager to write them.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  Left, Chrissy D'Aleo Fels and Adam Fels, with their children, outside their house in Upper Montclair, N.J. They beat out 18 bidders for the move-in-ready, four-bedroom Victorian, right, by making some concessions. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LAURA MOSS FOR THE new_york_times); Below, John Bruno outside his home in the Bronx. He and his wife were the winning bidders for a condo in Maplewood, N.J. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT PRESUTTI FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004l "
211		"    Black Heroes Reimagine The Fight For Equality  By Veronica Chambers  2,072 words 25 April 2021   10     After the success of the Star Wars series ''The Mandalorian'' and the Marvel series ''WandaVision,'' the bar was set high for ''The Falcon and the Winter Soldier.'' But the series that focuses on two secondary characters -- one Black and one white -- from the Captain America comic book story line surpassed those expectations as the most watched premiere in Disney+ history. As the show's first season comes to an end on Friday, its success can be seen as part of a wave of Black superheroes that have conquered our screens and comic book pages in recent years, in numbers -- and with a nuance -- never seen before.  The actor Teyonah Parris drew praise as Monica Rambeau on ''WandaVision'' and will reprise her role in the upcoming ''Captain Marvel 2'' -- a film being directed by Nia DaCosta, the first Black woman (and fourth woman of any background) to direct a Marvel movie.  Last year, DC Comics revived a character named Nubia, a Black Amazon who was raised alongside Wonder Woman and who first appeared in the comics in 1973. This new incarnation of Nubia is 17, has two mothers and, when she tries to save the day, she's profiled and detained by the police. The young adult graphic novel, written by the author L.L. McKinney with art by Robyn Smith, states its intention to answer the question: ''Can you be a hero ... if society doesn't see you as a person?'' The more traditional incarnation of Nubia was recently seen in Future State, a two-month story line that explored DC's heroes decades from now, and in the present, she is currently the Queen of the Amazons.  In ''The Umbrella Academy,'' Allison Hargreeves is one of a posse of supernaturally gifted siblings raised to save the world -- but one whose particular ability speaks subtly but powerfully to the notion of Blackness as a superpower.  In his book ''Super Black: American Pop Culture and Black Superheroes,'' Adilifu Nama, a professor of African-American Studies at Loyola Marymount University, writes about Falcon's transformation in the 1970s from Captain America's sidekick to a superhero in his own right. In the comic book, Sam Wilson's wings are a gift from the Black Panther -- a result of Wakandan technology. As Nama writes, ''By possessing the most venerated powers in the superhero universe, the Falcon's flight symbolized Black social and economic upward mobility that was right in line with real world changes.''  A common theme threaded throughout all these Black superhero narratives is the way that society questions the worthiness of African-Americans. What the creators and characters you'll read about in this package underscore is that the arc of Black superheroes is anchored by a continuing need to portray the humanity of Black people in an ongoing quest for justice and equality.  At the end of ''Avengers: Endgame,'' upon his retirement, Steve Rogers gives his iconic shield to Wilson (played with grace and powerful subtlety by Anthony Mackie). It's understood that Rogers believes that Wilson -- who as Falcon has been his sidekick -- is ready to take center stage as the next Captain America.  In ''The Falcon and the Winter Soldier,'' Wilson's decision to not become the next Captain America lays the foundation for the entire series, and is a point of contention for Bucky Barnes, the white character known as the Winter Soldier. Yet this friction demonstrates for us a rare dynamic not usually seen in traditional interracial buddy movies. Barnes tells Wilson, ''You had no right to give up the shield, Sam.'' To which Wilson responds, ''This is not what you're gonna do. You're not gonna come here in your overextended life and tell me about my rights.''  What happens next is truly revelatory. Barnes doesn't argue with Wilson from his own limited understanding. He doesn't try to explain to Wilson why a Black man should be the next Captain America. Instead, Bucky just listens.  Again and again, throughout ''Falcon,'' a show scripted by a Black showrunner and featuring a diverse writers' room, the white character listens -- and in doing so, respectfully acknowledges just how much he doesn't know.  Malcolm Spellman, the ''Falcon'' showrunner, has said he believes Black superheroes are enjoying a moment because they have a universal appeal; as he told Variety, ''our struggle and our point of view is a concentrated version of the greater human struggle.''  In an interview with The new_york_times, Spellman explained his decision to include the Black character of Isaiah Bradley in the Disney+ series, which he credits to having a writers' room that was made up predominantly of people of color.  Bradley is a character from the 2003 Captain America comic book series, Truth: Red, White and Black, by the writer Robert Morales and the artist Kyle Baker. In ''Falcon,'' Sam meets Bradley and learns that Steve Rogers wasn't the only super soldier in World War II. In a narrative parallel to the Tuskegee Experiment -- where hundreds of Black men were used as human guinea pigs in medical studies conducted by the U.S. government -- the Captain America serum was also tested on Bradley and other Black soldiers, many of whom suffered and died.  Bradley's arc in the comic books is reflective of the journey of many Black soldiers in the 20th century: great bravery on the frontline, distrust and even wrongful imprisonment upon returning to the country they fought hard to defend.  ''I knew we needed a character that was going to be the living embodiment of Sam's doubt,'' said Spellman of Bradley. ''We wanted Sam's doubt to be not something he overcomes but something he deals with. Meaning we wanted to validate the concern Sam has about whether or not it's appropriate for a Black man to don the stars and stripes.''  The fact that Spellman is guiding the show gives ''Falcon'' a different feel than many previous Black superhero narratives. It also confirms that what happens behind the cameras matters, from showrunners to writers to directors. From the Ryan Coogler-helmed hit movie ''Black Panther'' to Black writer-led shows like ''Marvel's Luke Cage'' and ''Falcon,'' Black creators are adding a subtlety to the story lines that make the characters resonate powerfully with fans.  Historical parallels to the Black experience have certainly shown up in comic book story lines before. Two primary white characters in the X-Men mythology -- the conciliatory Professor X and his radical once-friend turned enemy Magneto -- have long been rumored to be inspired by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X. (The fan art of this particular theory is pretty compelling, even if we accept that this particular theory is just a clever retcon framing.)  Stan Lee, who created the X-Men with Jack Kirby, definitely had the struggle for racial equality on his mind when the comic was created in 1963. ''It occurred to me that instead of them just being heroes that everybody admired, what if I made other people fear and suspect and actually hate them because they were different?'' Lee told The Guardian in 2000. ''I loved that idea; it not only made them different, but it was a good metaphor for what was happening with the civil rights movement in the country at that time.''  Jason Concepcion, co-host of popular culture podcasts such as Takeline and Binge Mode, sees a powerful parallel between how comics explore the world of mutants, the X-Men and their relationship to the Civil Rights struggle, and the conversations at the center of the Black Lives Matter movement.  As Concepcion explained in an interview, ''Magneto's pretty cleareyed in his analysis that, 'Why are we trying to prove that we're good people to these people? Why are we trying to prove anything to them when they're constantly trying to kill us?' And also the oppressed group can't fix the problem. Empathy with their situation can be part of the solution, but they don't actually hold the levers of power that would solve the problem.''  Sean Howe, author of ''Marvel Comics: The Untold Story,'' notes that it's the multiplicity of narratives that makes these characters so compelling. Black heroes, in real life, must often tread a singular path. Black superheroes exist in a realm notable for its elasticity -- there is room to gain new powers, make grand mistakes -- and there's always a new story line just waiting for the creators to dream it up.  ''The one thing about comic book characters -- as opposed to, say, characters in a franchise like Harry Potter -- is that they change,'' Howe said in a video interview. ''Everyone's familiar with the term rebooting now, but there's different iterations of an origin story. And so maybe in the 1980s, someone thought they would really take that Malcolm X/Martin Luther King thing [with X-Men] and run with it a little bit more. And these qualities start to either attach to the characters or they wash away depending on how many writers embrace them.''  This notion of reflecting the Black experience through the prism of superpowers has carried over to contemporary story lines. In ''The Umbrella Academy,'' Allison Hargreeves's gift is that she can begin any sentence with the phrase ''I heard a rumor ...'' and control minds at a level that can alter whole world events.  In the comic book that the Netflix series is based on, Hargreeves is white. Onscreen, though, she is played deftly by the Black actress Emmy Raver-Lampman. Allison's power rings differently in the body of a Black woman. In season two, the showrunners demonstrate just how differently -- by transporting Allison and her siblings to Dallas in 1963, days before the assassination of J.F.K.  In this universe, Allison is married to a Black man and, in order not to be revealed as a superhero, she must not use her power, even as she goes through a frightening array of segregationist intimidations.  It is only when a police officer is beating her husband that Allison ''rumors'' him, using her voice to stop the violence that she has seen play out again and again, both in 1963 and in our own time.  The ''whisper'' power that Allison uses recalls how so much of the Civil Rights movement and the fight for freedom and equality lies in the voices of Black heroes and their power of persuasion. It's easy to imagine historical figures through the lens of Allison's rumoring. For example, Harriet Tubman: ''I heard a rumor ... that there's a place where Black people can live free.'' Or Frederick Douglass: ''I heard a rumor ... that Black men will vote and that, before the year 1900, 1,500 Black Americans will hold office including seats in the House and Senate.''  In fact, the notion of Harriet Tubman as a superhero is a favorite subject of comic book fan art. She is also the subject of a graphic novel series by David Crownson, which was funded by a Kickstarter campaign.  The slim books, available on Comixology, are beautifully drawn, with a palpable eeriness in the panels. The slave catchers aren't just evil: They're vampires. Harriet Tubman doesn't just defend the people she's guiding to freedom; she wields katanas and wordplay to outwit and overcome the white men who see her and her people as mere chattel.  All of these heroes are, in their own way, fighting for an equality that seems ever elusive. For Spellman, the opportunity to write stories about Black superheroes is part of a concerted effort to tip the scales.  ''I absolutely believe that this helps re-contextualize us in a more universal way,'' he said. ''If we are first and foremost perceived as less than, and I do believe that everybody on the planet looks at us that way, a superhero is greater than. That primal math, via a megaphone like Marvel -- that's powerful.''  George Gene Gustines and Lauren Messman contributed research.  Anthony Mackie in ''The Falcon and the Winter Soldier.'' The showrunner for the series told Variety that the struggles of Black superheroes were ''a concentrated version of the greater human struggle.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHUCK ZLOTNICK/MARVEL STUDIOS) (AR10-AR11)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004j "
212		"    The Black Widow Battles Her Toughest Opponent  By Jonathan Abrams  1,645 words 25 April 2021   34     If you can name just one billiards player, it's probably Jeanette Lee, who is known as the Black Widow. She recently learned she has Stage 4 ovarian cancer.  Jeanette Lee, better known as the Black Widow, spent years dominating pool tables despite degenerative, debilitating pain and became a top-ranked women's billiards champion.  She learned she had scoliosis as a teenager and has undergone numerous procedures for the condition.  Every vertebra from her skull to her tailbone is fused.  ''I don't know why I felt like there was a race, but I always felt like there was and every minute I was playing pool, I was gaining on the people above me, and every time I was sidelined, I was just losing that edge,'' Lee said.  In that chase, Lee, 49, became accustomed to brushing aside discomfort, which was as much a part of her life as her nose.  A staph infection? She bandaged the wound for a few days, hoping it would heal on its own. Back pain? A given, but the agony ratcheted up even more last year. Doctors belatedly discovered a severe kidney infection when she finally sought help.  Now, she is facing perhaps her most difficult test in a life of pushing through adversity. Lee recently learned that she had Stage 4 ovarian cancer, causing her to tap into her well-developed skills of persistence and to worry about the future for her children.  Throughout the winter, Lee dismissed her trouble breathing as a sign of a panic attack. She had hesitated to go anywhere during the coronavirus pandemic because she had a compromised immune system. Only after four days of not being able to sleep, of feeling as if she were drowning whenever she lay down, did Lee visit an urgent care center.  Instead of a panic attack, she now figured that she had the beginnings of a bronchial infection.  The medical staff told Lee she had fluid in her lungs and sent her to a hospital. In January, doctors discovered the cancer. Lee's thoughts immediately went to her daughters: Cheyenne, 16, Chloe, 11, and Savannah, 10.  ''I don't want to die, and I do worry about my girls,'' Lee said. ''When I do cry, it's always about the idea of my little girls.''  Lee said though chemotherapy has been painful, ''it's nothing compared to what I think my children have to go through watching me.''  She described her daughters as sweet, loving and bubbling with laughter.  ''When's the next time they're going to laugh like that again?'' she said.  Lee is committed to pushing through, despite the odds. Scoliosis would have sidelined most. Pseudarthrosis -- a condition that occurs following an unsuccessful spinal fusion surgery -- bursitis and bicep tendinitis in her shoulders came later, along with carpal tunnel syndrome and severe sciatic pain. Stretching her arms across a pool table was agonizing.  ''I think with each hardship, there's something that you learn and you grow from it as long as you're looking up,'' Lee said. ''You're not looking down, feeling sorry for yourself. You're figuring out, 'What can I do with what I've got?' Because I don't have a choice. Like, people say that I'm courageous or strong, but I don't have a choice. What's my other option?''  As much as the pain allowed her to be and often despite its presence, Lee was ubiquitous within her sport.  If a person can name one pool player of the last generation, it's probably Lee. She carved her place in a male-dominated sport and earned her fitting nickname by dressing in all black and stalking opponents at the table before mercilessly defeating them.  ''No one in pool worked harder than Jeanette to transcend the sport,'' said Mike Panozzo, the publisher of Billiards Digest. ''She did that mostly by herself. Her drive was unbelievable. She always had time for everyone and anyone. And because of that, Jeanette became pool to people outside of the sport and industry.  ''Everyone knew the Black Widow.''  Lee was the rare billiards player to cross over into the mainstream realm. She was a focus of the sport on ESPN. She appeared in a Disney film, posed in ESPN The Magazine's Body Issue and appeared in ads for Bass Pro Shops.  As a child, she was drawn to mind games like puzzles and riddles. She experienced isolation growing up as one of the few Korean-Americans in her Brooklyn neighborhood. Billiards and all its angles and geometry mesmerized Lee when she walked into a pool hall at the age of 18. The game was democratic in nature.  ''Pool is something that you're going to see at the Boys & Girls Club and you're going to see it at the ritziest hotels or mansions,'' Lee said. ''It doesn't discriminate based on age, social stature, race. It just doesn't matter. Everyone plays pool. So, everyone has an idea how tough it is. They can relate to it.''  She enjoyed that toughness, the test of wills. When others cowered from nerves, she surged on adrenaline.  ''I love the challenge of battling my mind against yours on who's going to take this,'' Lee said. ''And I just went after it. And it was exciting. It was sexy. It's beautiful. It's graceful and, at times, it brings the power out of you.''  She would tape her left hand for days in the form of the perfect bridge, hoping muscle memory would allow her to repeat it at the table. She honed her form by aiming at an empty soda bottle, playing long enough that she could no longer hold herself upright from the back pain as friends carried her from pool halls.  Lee turned pro in 1993. At first, she bristled when people took to calling her the Black Widow.  She worried what people thought of her steely demeanor, even though her appearance was the last thing she was thinking about while at the pool table.  ''Eventually, I owned it,'' she said. ''I loved it.''  She never missed a chance to promote herself or her sport. She was on the road for as many 300 days a year.  ''I grew up with no money and so I knew that the only way I could keep doing what I love for a living is if I was to gain sponsorships,'' she said, adding that she thought being a woman and Asian American helped her stand out.  She spent much of the 1990s as the world's top-ranked female player. In 1998, she was named the Women's Professional Billiard Association Sportsperson of the Year. Three years later, she captured the gold medal for the United States at the World Games in Akita, Japan. Before the World Games, Lee struggled with the amount of publicity she received.  ''I went a long time questioning whether or not I deserve the attention that I got and this was something that you can't just deny,'' Lee said.  Pain, more than any competitor, was her most persistent opponent. ''I wanted to be the best, and I never lost my grip on that idea of becoming the best,'' she said.  Lee continued: ''But after a while you get through life and you look around and you realize that you're the last person standing and just that by itself, by not giving up, by continuing to push when everything feels like it's pulling you down, just by being the last person standing, it makes you a champion.''  Along the way, Lee found that she had inspired people by playing with scoliosis. She hopes that she will do the same as she deals with cancer.  ''I feel like everything I've gone through to this point, all the people I've inspired, all the hardships I've endured were to prepare me for this moment,'' Lee said.  Lee is in the middle of six rounds of chemotherapy, each separated by about three weeks. She recently had surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible. The five-year relative survival rate for ovarian cancer depends on the stage at diagnosis, the type of ovarian cancer and many other factors. For people whose cancer has spread, as in Stage 4, the rate is 30.3 percent, according to the National Cancer Institute, which is part of the federal National Institutes of Health.  Many women, like Lee, do not learn they have ovarian cancer until it is in advanced stages because the symptoms can be mild and are often attributed to other conditions.  Tom George, Lee's longtime manager and the principal at TG Sports & Literary, spent years watching Lee devote her time to others. With Lee's support, he started a GoFundMe page for her children. Her primary concern was that they would be cared for. The fund has raised nearly $250,000.  The drive Lee had to become the best billiards player is no longer there. Her new focus is more important.  ''Everything has been a battle and it's been obstacle over obstacle that I've had to climb through, climb over, climb around,'' Lee said, ''and now I just want to have joy, and I want my children to have that.''  Jeanette Lee hitting a break during the women's world 9-ball championship in 2008. Right, Lee taking aim at a celebrity tournament in 2011. Middle right, Lee with her daughters Cheyenne, Chloe and Savannah, and her foster son, John Kang. Below right, Lee at a sports gala in 2012. At first she bristled at being called the Black Widow. ''Eventually,'' she said, ''I owned it.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY REUTERS/NICKY LOH; GETTY IMAGES; LEE FAMILY)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004k "
213		"    Steel Forged In All the Colors That We Need  By George Gene Gustines  1,346 words 25 April 2021   11     As renewed rumors of a Black Superman movie swirl, here is the complicated history of reimagining the most iconic comic hero as a Black man.  In 2008, during his presidential campaign, Barack Obama told a joke at a charity event. ''Contrary to the rumors you have heard, I was not born in a manger,'' he said. ''I was actually born on Krypton and sent here by my father, Jor-El, to save the planet Earth.''  And a couple of months prior, the artist Alex Ross made a painting of Obama depicting him in a Clark Kent-like pose with an unbuttoned shirt revealing his costume -- this one with an ''O'' instead of an ''S'' -- underneath.  All of this inspired the comic book writer Grant Morrison: Why not create a Black Superman?  And so was born Calvin Ellis, a Black Man of Steel brought to life by Morrison and the artist Doug Mahnke, who envisioned the character as a beacon of hope who would fight alongside Superman and the other heroes of DC Comics in an apocalyptic story line titled Final Crisis, which ran from 2008 to 2009. In the narrative, Ellis came from an alternate version of Earth. In his reality, he was the most powerful man on Earth twice-over: He was Superman and the president of the United States.  ''Final Crisis was kind of a response to the Bush era and that sense of permanent war and that the bad guys had won,'' Morrison said. President Superman, as Ellis is known, was meant to embody the opposite -- ''a shinier way forward,'' as Morrison put it. (His teammates included a Black Wonder Woman, inspired by Beyoncé.)  Fans embraced this version of Superman as an alternate depiction of arguably the most iconic superhero of all: the Man of Steel, who made his debut in 1938. Decades later, Superman remains a global hero. His ''S'' is recognized around the world, and he epitomizes compassion and the quest for truth and justice. Recasting Superman as Black has a singular resonance, and the potential to open up the character to new fans.  President Superman is just one nonwhite version of the Man of Steel that comic book fans are familiar with. They include Sunshine Superman, created by Morrison and the artist Chaz Truog in 1990, and Kong Kenan, the Super-Man of China, who was introduced in 2016 by Gene Luen Yang and Viktor Bogdanovic.  This year, it was announced that the writer Ta-Nehisi Coates is working on a Superman screenplay, and unnamed sources told the Hollywood Reporter the film would set up a Black Superman. If that character is, in fact, President Superman, there is an actor who has already expressed interest in portraying him: In 2019, Oprah Winfrey asked Michael B. Jordan about rumors that he would play Superman. Jordan was hesitant to play Clark Kent, but, he said, ''I'll be Calvin Ellis.''  The possibility of a nontraditional Superman getting his chance at the spotlight is a welcome notion to many. ''I didn't see a lot of representation that included myself or my friends and family when I was a kid growing up,'' said David F. Walker, a comic book writer, filmmaker and author. ''For every one female character, every one Black character, every one Latino character, every one queer character, there's 20 or 30 that aren't those things.''  Heroes like Superman and Spider-Man are often recast within comic stories, though rarely permanently. Characters are sometimes replacements who temporarily don Batman's cowl or borrow Iron Man's armor. Sometimes time travel or parallel worlds are involved, as with Calvin Ellis, where history developed differently and as a result so did its heroes.  Still, the back story of a character like Ellis can have deep resonance for readers of color. Readers learned more about his parallel world in a 2012 issue of Action Comics written by Morrison and drawn by Gene Ha. Like the original Superman, he was rocketed from Krypton on the eve of its destruction by his parents and is found by a couple (notably, both sets of parents are Black), and as an adult he begins the battle for ''truth, justice, liberty and equality'' as Superman.  Ha refined Ellis's appearance, modeling him after Muhammad Ali. ''I had been looking at this Superman vs. Muhammad Ali comic by Neal Adams from the 1970s and I just loved the scale of it and just the idea of Ali on every page punching Superman,'' Morrison said. (Adams adapted the comic based on a story by Denny O'Neil.)  Walker, along with co-creators Brian Michael Bendis and Jamal Campbell, had his own opportunity to contribute to the tapestry of DC Comics with the 2019 debut of Naomi McDuffie, a superpowered Black teenage girl who is adopted and sets out to learn more about her birth parents. (The character is being developed for television by the director Ava DuVernay.) ''The first time I saw a teenage Black girl cosplay as Naomi I was like, 'Wow, there is space for you here,''' Walker recalled. ''And I want there to be space for everybody.''  Naomi's last name is a tribute to Dwayne McDuffie, a popular Black comic book writer who was known for championing representation in comics. In 1993, he co-founded Milestone Media, a publishing imprint that centered on Black, Asian, Hispanic and gay superheroes. The Milestone version of Superman is Icon, an alien who arrived on Earth in 1839, and was created by Dwayne McDuffie and Mark Bright. An enslaved Black woman finds Icon's ship, and he adapts his appearance, including the color of his skin, to fit in. DC will begin publishing new series featuring the Milestone characters in June.  In a way, there has already been a Black Superman on the big screen: In 1997, Shaquille O'Neal starred in ''Steel,'' which was based on a DC Comics hero of the same name created by Louise Simonson and Jon Bogdanove. In his civilian guise he is Dr. John Henry Irons, who emerged to protect Metropolis in 1992 after Superman's death. (Spoiler: Superman returned the following year.) The comic character's fortunes were considerably better than that of the film, which a new_york_times review described as ''a tepid vat of cinematic sludge.''  A more recent Superman vying for film attention is Val-Zod, another Black Kryptonian, introduced in 2014 by the writer Tom Taylor and the artist Nicola Scott.  Taylor's approach to representation was to bring the stories into the present. ''Everything I write, whether it is TV or comics, represents the world as it is rather than 1950s American comics,'' he said. He also redefined the very idea of a superhero. ''I wanted to come up with someone who was pretty much the most powerful person on the planet, but he didn't want to punch anyone. He was a pacifist,'' he said. ''With great power comes great knowledge that you can hurt someone, and he didn't want to hurt anyone.''  The response to the character was overwhelmingly positive, Taylor recalled. ''It was a younger, nicer internet in those days,'' he said. Val-Zod was ''such a welcoming, warm, charming character that you rooted for him -- and our fans felt the same way. He came from a harsh planet and the world needed his light.''  ''I've said it for a very long time: Everyone needs heroes,'' Taylor continued. ''And everyone deserves to see themselves in their heroes.''  In the 1970s, Neal Adams wrote and drew Superman vs. Muhammad Ali, a comic based on a story by Denny O'Neil. Years later, the artist Gene Ha refined President Superman, modeling him on the famous boxer.; In 2009, DC Comics introduced Calvin Ellis, who on another Earth is both Superman and the president of the United States. The character was created by the writer Grant Morrison and the artist Doug Mahnke. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DC COMICS)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004i "
214		"   House & Home/ Try Talking To People Again  By Holly Burns  1,429 words 25 April 2021   4     Soon we will no longer be trapped in our homes and skittering away from strangers. A few experts remind us how to be social again.  After a year of isolation, there are things you start to forget. You forget how to stand in a crowded commuter train (legs apart, slight bend in the knee) or how to shimmy sheepishly past theatergoers to reach a middle seat (face away, apologize repeatedly).  And, without a constant parade of baby showers and work mixers, you forget how to talk to strangers: The witty banter, the conversational volley, the way you break the ice with ''How about this rain, huh?'' instead of ''So, what do you consider your greatest failure in life?''  But the world is starting to open up again, and that means having to engage in that dreaded four-letter word -- chat -- with people you don't know. If the idea makes you nervous, you're not alone.  ''Social anxiety is extremely normal,'' said Stefan G. Hofmann, director of the Psychotherapy and Emotion Research Laboratory at Boston University. ''As humans, we have a strong need to belong and feel part of a group.''  Still, knowing something is normal doesn't make it easier. How can you coax yourself out of hermithood and talk to people when your social skills feel blunted by quarantine? Here's some advice from people whose jobs require them to make friends with strangers every day.  Embrace the awkward bits. (And there will be awkward bits.)  Amanda Zion, a hair stylist in Davidson, N.C., is well-versed in making small talk. But for someone who gets shy around new people, it doesn't always come naturally. ''It's excruciating,'' she said. ''I get anxious before every client.''  Her golden rule? When an interaction feels stilted, she acknowledges it out loud. ''I'll say, 'I'm sorry, I feel so awkward today,' '' she said. ''I try to break down the barrier with honesty or even a joke -- like, 'Wow, those 37 cups of coffee didn't help!'''  A one-two punch of self-deprecating humor and direct instruction can work wonders, said Jennifer Hornbeck, an Episcopalian priest in Sonoma County, Calif., who's had ''a lot of practice'' mingling at after-church coffee hours in the 20 years since she was ordained. ''Make light of it, then give the other person a framework to help you,'' she said. ''I'll say: 'I seem to have forgotten how to have a conversation. Can you tell me about your day?'''  Use the pandemic to connect, but tread carefully.  Whenever Ms. Hornbeck has felt stuck talking to congregants this year, she's leaned on a fail-safe topic: the pandemic.  ''It's a jumping off point we didn't have before,'' she said. ''I like asking, 'What hobby did you think you'd take up in quarantine but never did?'''  Establishing commonalities is how we connect, said Dr. Hofmann, so a collective experience like the pandemic can provide us with ample discussion points. Still, he said, remember that it's not always innocuous.  ''If the person you're talking to has lost a job or a loved one, they may not want to discuss it with a stranger,'' he said.  It helps to share your own experience first, said Larry Cohen, a therapist in Washington, D.C., who runs social anxiety workshops. ''That way, you're the one being vulnerable and opening the door, and they can walk through it if they want to.''  And if you walk through it to find yourself in a wildly different room, it's fine to walk back out. When a recent conversation about masks veered into uncomfortable political territory, Ms. Zion was loath to join in. To extricate yourself gracefully from a topic you'd rather not touch, ''say something affirming and sincere -- 'Yes, these are really hard times' -- and then move to a different subject,'' said Mr. Cohen.  Interject a little positivity.  While commiserating over a shared adversity can be a bonding experience, Mr. Cohen said, ''you don't want the focus with a new person to be overwhelmingly on the negative.''  When a conversation feels like it's verging on a complaint-fest -- cathartic, sure, but kind of a downer -- Ms. Zion steers it toward more optimistic territory. ''If someone only wants to talk about how bad their vaccine side effects were,'' she said, ''I'll ask, 'But what are you most excited to do now you're vaccinated?'''  Clementina Richardson, a celebrity eyelash stylist whose clients include Mary J. Blige and Julia Roberts, makes the positive comment personal.  ''I always try to offer a compliment,'' said Ms. Richardson, the founder of Envious Lashes, an eyelash extension salon in New York. ''People haven't gone anywhere for a year. Some of them are feeling a little self-conscious about their appearance. Noticing something -- their hair, their bag -- and saying something nice about it helps make them feel more comfortable.''  Don't overthink it.  Meghan Dhaliwal's work as a freelance documentary photographer (including for The new_york_times) means she has to gain the trust of strangers on each assignment, despite being a self-described introvert. In some cases, the person she's photographing has undergone a difficult experience, and her role is to capture them intimately without stepping over delicate boundaries.  To lower the pressure of the situation, she tries to put a subject at ease by tuning in to the way they're feeling, matching her energy level to theirs and paying attention to their body language.  ''I'll start by asking something light that has nothing to do with why I'm photographing them,'' she said. ''I'll listen and take my cues from their answer. When you give someone a little space to warm up to you, it's easier to start chatting and find common ground.''  Mr. Cohen gives his patients a similar exercise, what he calls ''curiosity training.'' While it can be tempting to construct a conversational safety net by continuously planning out the next thing you're going to say, it also makes it harder to pay attention to the exchange you're having.  ''The better thing to do, even if it feels like a leap of faith, is to listen with curiosity,'' he said. ''Step away from the idea of performance, of 'I need to make this go well,' and try instead to adopt a stance of mindfulness.''  Allowing yourself to become absorbed in the conversation, Mr. Cohen said, means your brain will start doing the work for you, tossing out questions and opinions you can contribute.  Practice being in control.  While this may not be the time to expose yourself to large crowds, ''taking small, safe steps toward socializing again'' can alleviate some of the pressure you might feel about re-emerging into the world, said Mr. Cohen. ''Make it a goal to interact with one person every day.''  In her job as an account manager, Chicago-based Lindsey Friesen often challenges herself to spend 20 minutes calling clients before allowing herself to do more introspective work. To prepare for a return to networking events, she's practicing what she calls ''a sort of informal exposure therapy'': Running one errand a week that will result in a social interaction.  If she meets someone she knows she'll see again, she makes a quick note of something they talked about as conversational fodder for next time. And if she needs a moment to collect herself, she falls back on a trick she learned in therapy for a childhood stutter.  ''I always keep a water bottle with me, so I have a reason to stop talking,'' she said. ''When you take a sip of water, it's a pause that isn't weird. It gives you a few seconds to gather your thoughts or change the direction of what you were saying. Nobody has to know you're struggling.''  If all else fails: Netflix.  If, in the course of cutting someone's hair, Ms. Zion has exhausted all her conversational gambits, she falls back on the one thing she can count on to get people talking: what shows they've been binge-watching while stuck at home.  ''TV has probably been the biggest sparker of conversation with anyone this year,'' she said. ''You start with that and you can go anywhere.''  Holly Burns is a writer in the San Francisco Bay Area.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Miguel Porlan FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004f "
215		"   VOWS  In Matters of the Heart, a Couple of Real Experts  By Tammy La Gorce  2,185 words 25 April 2021   11     Angela Horan and Gary Bergstrom met online more than six years ago. Both have overcome serious health issues -- she a heart transplant, he a motorcycle accident.  In a pandemic landscape where big weddings still don't make sense to many, the wedding that Angela Horan and Gary Bergstrom put on March 20 at their seven-acre property in Myakka, Fla., did to them, somehow. Though at the time, Floridians were being encouraged not to gather in groups of more than 10, Ms. Horan and Mr. Bergstrom said they knew most of their 300 guests had been vaccinated or had Covid antibodies. And given the magnitude of the hurdles they had scaled as a couple, they decided an extra-large celebration was worth the risk.  Ms. Horan, 42, and Mr. Bergstrom, 53, met on the dating app Plenty of Fish in February 2015, just after Ms. Horan learned she had cardiomyopathy, a life-threatening heart condition. In December 2014, she was told she would need a heart transplant and, in the meantime, was implanted surgically with a device to keep her heart pumping.  Her choice to join a dating site in fragile health was odd timing, she knows. ''But at that point, things were getting worse and worse in my life,'' she said.  In addition to her diagnosis, she was going through a divorce and navigating life as a single parent in a new city. She and her three sons, twins Deven and Derek, then 16, plus Aidan, then 5, had moved to Venice, Fla., from San Diego, earlier in 2014. ''I finally said to myself, 'You know what? I'm dying.' I didn't know anybody in Florida. I had never really done anything in my life and I wanted to go out and do things.''  That was even if, while doing them, she had to wear a giant fanny pack with a cord attached to maintain the 24-hour intravenous drip that was keeping her heart pumping.  When Mr. Bergstrom saw Ms. Horan's picture on Plenty of Fish, she was close to giving up on meeting new people online. ''When you go on one of those sites, you get hundreds of men messaging you,'' she said. She was overwhelmed and leery of accepting invitations that didn't seem in line with her profile request to meet friends only. Mr. Bergstrom's message to her seemed worthy of deletion for a different reason. ''We're very, very different people as far as lifestyle goes,'' she said.  Mr. Bergstrom was a corporal in the Marine Corps and is the director of sales at Trident Building Systems, a construction company based in Sarasota. ''I like skydiving, scuba diving, snowboarding and basically anything that involves going faster,'' he said.  He is divorced and, like Ms. Horan, the single parent of three sons. Jacob is now 31 and has autism; Corey is 23; and Logan, 17. Ms. Horan's interests involve less adrenaline. ''I like karaoke,'' she said. ''I'm not very adventurous.''  In March 2015, it was Mr. Bergstrom's persistence that prompted Ms. Horan to accept a dinner invitation from him to Seasons 52, a restaurant in Sarasota. But by then she had been messaging so many potential friends she forgot which ones she told about her heart condition. So when Ms. Horan arrived at the restaurant, he wasn't sure why she was wearing the fanny pack, and she wasn't sure why he was curious about it.  ''I assumed I had already told him,'' she said. Instead, Mr. Bergstrom, then living in Bradenton, had to ask why she had a tube running from the pack under her shirt. She told him about her surgery, and that she was awaiting a heart transplant.  [ Sign up for Love Letter and always get the latest in Modern Love, weddings, and relationships in the news by email. ]  ''It didn't really matter to me,'' he said. ''I wanted to laugh and talk and have dinner with this woman.''  They did exactly that. When it was time to say goodbye, though, Mr. Bergstrom wasn't ready. He came up with a plan. ''She said she likes cheesecake, so I told her to follow me to the Cheesecake Factory so I could get her some to take home,'' he said. On the way, Ms. Horan rear-ended him at a stop sign.  ''Right as it was happening I looked in my rearview mirror and I could actually see the blue light from her phone, and that she was looking down at it.'' The collision barely dented either fender.  ''But I got out and I looked at the back of the car and the front of her car, and I saw she was sitting there with her head on the steering wheel, like, 'Oh, my God, I can't believe I just ran into this guy.''' He shook his head in mock irritation, then motioned for her to put down her window. When she did, he leaned in. Instead of calling her out for her carelessness, ''I took her face in my hands and kissed her. I said, 'Now you will never forget our first kiss.'''  With that, Ms. Horan gave up limiting her life, outside of her boys, to friends only. ''We became inseparable,'' she said. By May, they had met each other's sons. By summer, Mr. Bergstrom was attending her medical appointments. They gave him license to introduce her to the more fast-paced lifestyle he was used to.  ''The doctor basically said to me, 'Keep her busy. Do all the things she wants to do that she never got to do','' he said. It turned out Ms. Horan was more adventurous than she thought. When Mr. Bergstrom suggested they go zip-lining in the Appalachians, she was ready. When he asked her to ride on the back of his motorcycle through New England, where both are from originally -- she grew up in Assonet, Mass., and he in Barrington, N.H. -- she was instantly onboard.  ''Everything we did, we got nonstop 'What the hell are you doing?' from people,'' Mr. Bergstrom said. ''But by that point I had made it my focus to do nothing but make the most of the time we had together.''  Neither knew whether it would be days or decades. ''I just knew a lot of people who were on the transplant list didn't make it to the transplant, because sometimes a heart isn't available in time,'' Ms. Horan said.  In October 2015, Mr. Bergstrom was forced to re-evaluate his ambitions for a life of nonstop thrills when a car stopped short in front of him. He was driving home from work on his motorcycle. ''I went down, and the bike landed on top of me,'' he said. He broke eight bones and suffered severe tissue damage.  ''I'm a Marine Corps vet, and I have just never had to rely on another person to take care of me,'' he said. Ms. Horan volunteered anyway.  They had already reached the conclusion they wanted to be each other's caretakers for life. In November, while he was still recovering, they booked a trip to Las Vegas. There, at Elvis Chapel, they held hands during a commitment ceremony, complete with Elvis impersonator. All that was stopping them from getting married legally was Ms. Horan's pending divorce, which wasn't official until 2018.  Returning home to Florida with a newly defined commitment didn't spare them new trauma. ''As soon as we got back she started to die right before my eyes,'' Mr. Bergstrom said. ''We'd be having a conversation on the couch and she would just black out and slump over.'' Her medications were no longer working.  Hope arrived Dec. 19 in the form of a 1:30 a.m. phone call: A heart had become available. Ms. Horan was home in Venice, Mr. Bergstrom in Bradenton. He raced to pick her up. ''I broke all the speed rules,'' he said. Ms. Horan was too scared to notice. ''A lot of people die when they get the surgery,'' she said. ''I didn't know if I was ever going to wake up.''  Mr. Bergstrom and her sons were there when she did wake up. Because of her smooth recovery, her doctors were optimistic about her survival odds. Days later, they celebrated Christmas in her Tampa General Hospital room. During her three-month recovery, Mr. Bergstrom figured out a few things. One was an itinerary for further adventures, including skydiving and a motorcycle trip through Europe. Another was how to thank the person responsible for donating Ms. Horan's new heart.  Mr. Bergstrom and Heather Francis, Ms. Horan's best friend, had started piecing together the identity of the woman who may have enabled the transplant in the hospital waiting room; hearts must be transplanted within hours of a donor's death. They scanned police reports and news sites and came up with Laurie Kramer, a woman who had died in the area on Dec. 19. (Laws forbid medical staff from revealing a donor's personal information). Through Facebook, Mr. Bergstrom contacted Ms. Kramer's son, Douglas Vose. Mr. Vose of Alabama, N.Y., confirmed that he had authorized the donation.  A friendship with Mr. Vose soon developed. ''Hearing from them was a glimmer of hope in a very dark time,'' Mr. Vose said. A little more than a year later, in 2017, Mr. Bergstrom and Ms. Horan bought him an airline ticket to Florida. ''We met him at Off the Wagons Bar and Grill in Venice, and it was just the most natural thing,'' Mr. Bergstrom said. ''I felt a connection to him right away,'' Ms. Horan said.  At their wedding four years later, Mr. Vose, together with Ms. Horan's stepfather, Martin Glover, walked her down the aisle in Myakka, where the couple moved in 2018. (Mr. Bergstrom proposed on Dec. 19, 2019, the four-year anniversary of Ms. Horan's heart transplant.)  Before the couple joined Bonnie Sanchez, an officiant through American Marriage Ministries, under an outdoor arch draped in pink and white fabric, they played a 16-minute video detailing the highs and lows of their journey for guests.  Among the speakers in the film was Mr. Vose. ''My mom was a free spirit,'' he says. ''She was funny, kind, smart and beautiful, and everybody she ever met loved her.'' As the video wrapped, scores of guests were in tears.  When Ms. Horan joined Mr. Bergstrom at the altar, with her escorts beside her, more collective tears flowed. By the time Ms. Sanchez pronounced them married 30 minutes later, each had vowed to never take the other for granted, and to forever cherish the other's heart.  On This Day  When March 20, 2021  Where Myakka, Fla.  Masks Suggested The bride and the groom, who said they both had the coronavirus about four months ago, did not require their guests to have Covid tests before the wedding. Masks were suggested, and tables at an outdoor cocktail hour and reception were set six feet apart. ''We wanted to let them have the best wedding they possibly can,'' said their wedding planner, Michelle Borrero of Precious Moment Events, which is based in Sarasota.  Southern Style For dinner, guests chose from entrees including pulled chicken, ribs and brisket from nearby Mission BBQ. Desserts included fruit cobblers and a wedding cake from Publix.  More to Come ''Live Like You Were Dying,'' the Tim McGraw hit, was the couple's choice for a first dance at the reception, at which two bands played and three bars were staffed with bartenders. ''It's our theme song,'' Mr. Bergstrom said.  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook ( Styles and Modern Love ), Twitter ( Styles , Fashion and Weddings ) and Instagram .  On This Day When March 20, 2021 Where Myakka, Fla. Masks Suggested The bride and the groom, who said they both had the coronavirus about four months ago, did not require their guests to have Covid tests before the wedding. Masks were suggested, and tables at an outdoor cocktail hour and reception were set six feet apart. ''We wanted to let them have the best wedding they possibly can,'' said their wedding planner, Michelle Borrero of Precious Moment Events, which is based in Sarasota. Southern Style For dinner, guests chose from entrees including pulled chicken, ribs and brisket from nearby Mission BBQ. Desserts included fruit cobblers and a wedding cake from Publix. More to Come ''Live Like You Were Dying,'' the Tim McGraw hit, was the couple's choice for a first dance at the reception, at which two bands played and three bars were staffed with bartenders. ''It's our theme song,'' Mr. Bergstrom said.  Angela Horan and Gary Bergstrom at their wedding in Myakka, Fla. The bride was escorted by her stepfather, Martin Glover, and Douglas Vose, the son of the donor of the heart she received. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ZACK WITTMAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004e "
216		"   SCENE CITY  An Exploration of Art, Nature and Self  By Ruth La Ferla  1,422 words 25 April 2021   10     And how Daniel Arsham and Rachel Comey are re-emerging from the pandemic.  With the New York charity circuit on hiatus, here is how some philanthropists and society figures are spending their time and resources during the pandemic.  Nikki Haskell  Age: 79  Occupation: talk show host, party planner, diet and fitness entrepreneur  Favorite charities: Nancy Davis Race to Erase MS, Angel Ball, Carousel of Hope, Project Angel Food  Where have you been sheltering?  I live in a high-rise in the Wilshire Corridor in Los Angeles. I can see the golf course and, to the east, the snow-capped mountains. I get up every morning and I get dressed. I'm in full makeup every day.  What about now?  Actually, I'm wearing a robe. I just got out of the bathtub. I'm working on my party. We're going to celebrate my 80th birthday on May 17 at the Beverly Hills Hotel. I'm not shy about anything and definitely not shy about my birthday.  Neither age nor the pandemic have put a dent in your plans.  I'm thrilled every morning. I look at life as a positive. I'm not waiting for things to clear up or go by. You've got to seize the moment.  You seem to be doing just that.  I'm going to bring out a product. It's the Star Shooterz, an iPhone case with a selfie stick that lets you take the perfect selfie. I have ''The Nikki Haskell Show'' on Amazon, with episodes of my talk show that first ran in the 1980s. The show was almost like a melting pot. I became friends with most of the people I interviewed-- Clive Davis, Neil Sedaka, Robert Wagner, Joan Collins.  Why would an audience tune in now?  We have lived in a year saturated with disastrous news. We've been at a standstill culturally. People think, is there anyone out there that is fun? We lived through the most fabulous time in the '80s. The baby boomers were opulent. They wanted to have a good time, travel the world, wear beautiful clothes, not black tights and a black T-shirt with a sweater wrapped around the waist. If you ever found me in an outfit like that, you'd know I was kidnapped.  What are some of the show's highlights?  We shot a lot at Studio 54. We talked to Andy Warhol, Liza Minnelli Calvin Klein. I was the first person who interviewed Donald Trump in the Trump Tower, during the groundbreaking. Actually, Donald told me in those days that he wanted to be president.  You voted for him. You've maintained a friendship with the Trumps. Has that cost you?  I've had turmoil. But my political affiliations have nothing to do with my friends. You have to stand up for what you believe in. I don't apologize for anything.  Daniel Arsham  Age: 40  Occupation: artist  Favorite Charity: the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art  Where have you been sheltering?  A couple of years ago I purchased a 1971 Norman Jaffe house on the Long Island Sound. We were out there, my wife and two boys who are 4 and 8, from March until summer. Now we're back in our apartment in Williamsburg. Most years, I traveled about half the time. Now I get to spend a lot of time with the kids. I'm also painting and drawing. Sometimes drawing is a way for me to understand and unpack my work in different ways.  One of your works is on view at the LongHouse Reserve, which reopened this month in East Hampton. Please tell us about it.  It's a 12-foot-tall bronze work cast from the Venus de Milo. The bronze has a patina, so it looks like it's been sitting there for many years, and it's clustered with crystals.  How does it relate to your body of work?  I try to make my work float in time a little bit, so that it feels linked to now, but could also be from the past or the future. Giorgio di Chirico, an early favorite artist of mine, included ancient works in his painting but placed those in very modern scenarios. They could have been made any time in the past hundred years. I like that.  You have worked in the fashion world. What drew you?  Fashion is a very different way of creating meaning, creating value. A lot of clothing that I wear is vintage. I have a pretty substantial sneaker collection that dates back to the mid-'80s. Clothing gains character through the user, and it's very much tied to the zeitgeist. A lot of artists try to escape their era, to create a timeless work. To a certain degree, that's impossible.  Has the pandemic changed our perception of time?  For a lot of us, living through it felt very long. Now looking back, it feels very short. So many of us can remember exact moment when we were told we had to go into lockdown. We have a visceral sense of that moment. It can still feel very present. That the normalcy of everyday life can be so dramatically altered in the span of a day or a couple of weeks -- few generations have experienced that.  Rachel Comey  Age: 48  Occupation: fashion designer  Favorite Charities: Fabscrap, Dress for Success, Housing Works, Community Fridge  Where have you spent the past few months?  I live in Garrison, N.Y. We moved out here five years ago. I can see from our window that spring is here. The forsythia is all around us, electric yellow, on the streets, around my neighbors' houses. I'm looking forward to the swallows coming back. Last year they came on Earth Day. I wondered if they were going to fly in on the same day.  Sounds idyllic. What are you doing for fun?  We live right on the Appalachian Trail so we hike a ton. I'm doing my garden -- you know, tackling all those middle-age pursuits.  You've worked as an artist, on your own. Did that alone time prepare you for lockdown?  No. One of the reasons I didn't pursue art ultimately was that it was so solitary. I like the collaboration of the designer, patternmaker, manufacturer and the wearer all coming together. Still, with the solitude, we've learned as a business that maybe the rigor of 9 to 5 doesn't have to be there.  There must have been challenges.  It was scary from the business side. We had to think about closing the store for a time, about absorbing inventory. We'd been shipping from our warehouse in Brooklyn, but the warehouse closed. Last year we did a sample sale out of our garage. I liked packing orders that had color, prints and sequins. It gave me hope. I'm good at working. It's my therapy. Maybe I'm twisted that way.  You have a new pop-up store on Smith Street, in Brooklyn. How is that working out?  The first people to come back were the seniors because they were vaccinated. ''Oh, we're so excited,'' they told me. ''We haven't been out in a year.'' We're putting together a new model for showing artwork, a shop within the shop, with installations by friends including Chelsea Spengemann, Gwen Smith and Sara VanDerBeek.  What looks are people craving?  People are starting to buy shoes again. My retail director tells me that they're buying belts. They're showing their waists -- a sign things are changing.  What will you be wearing?  I'm excited for high heels. I'm not dying for a miniskirt, but I'm not afraid of it either. What we've learned is that clothes can really bring you joy.  Interviews have been edited.  From left: Daniel Arsham at the Brooklyn Artists Ball in 2019; with Victor Cruz at a Kith fashion show in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KRISTA SCHLUETER FOR THE new_york_times; SHAWN BRACKBILL FOR THE new_york_times); From left: Rachel Comey, left, at a Whitney Museum dinner in 2020; Ms. Comey at her fashion show in 2020. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY REBECCA SMEYNE FOR THE new_york_times); Nikki Haskell in attendance at a ''Game of Thrones'' final season premiere in New York in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY LOMBARD FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004d "
217		"   NEWS ANALYSIS  The Pandemic Shrank Our Social Circles. Let's Keep It That Way.  By Kate Murphy  1,569 words 25 April 2021   4     You don't need to rekindle your friendship with your kid's soccer teammate's father if you don't want to.  While other people stockpiled toilet paper and dried beans last year, Sheldon Cohen prepared for the pandemic by compiling a list of family members, friends and colleagues with whom he wanted to be in regular contact during what he rightly feared would be an extended period of isolation. A professor of psychology at Carnegie-Mellon University, Dr. Cohen has spent much of his career studying the link between social ties and health, and the idea that maintaining relationships is, as he put it, ''good for you.''  But some relationships are better than others. So Dr. Cohen treated the 800-some contacts on his phone like a data set and sorted people according to various relational, emotional and behavioral criteria to come up with a shortlist of 50 individuals, ranked according to how often he wished to interact with them and how often he thought they might want to hear from him.  Whether a contact got a phone call every few days or a text or an email every few months depended on that person's position in the hierarchy. ''It's an interesting way to think about your social network,'' Dr. Cohen said. ''How you define a social tie determines who gets on the list and how meaningful they are to you.''  Few are as deliberate as Dr. Cohen, but we have all been making similar calculations during the pandemic. Do I like these people enough to include them in my pod? Can I endure another Zoom happy hour with the people in my running club? Is it worth the risk to travel to my former roommate's wedding?  The past year has forced a mass meditation on the nature and strength of our social ties. While our culture has encouraged us to accumulate friends, both on- and offline, like points, the pandemic has laid bare the distinction between quantity and quality of connections. There are those we've longed to see and those it's been a relief not to see. The full reckoning will become apparent only when we can once again safely gather and invitations are -- or are not -- extended. Our social lives and social selves may never be the same.  Take Rachel Ernst, who joined a pod of six other single people in the San Francisco Bay Area at the start of the pandemic. While she didn't know them well at the outset, she now regards them as her closest friends, thanks to their deep conversations about life, death, faith and justice, rather than the more superficial social chitchat she had grown accustomed to before the pandemic.  Previously, she said, her social life was a mad dash from one social event to another. ''I had a pretty broad group of friends in a lot of different places, but it wasn't always a deep or fulfilling connection,'' Ms. Ernst said. She was also exhausted most of the time.  ''Now I know I can just relax into deeper friendships,'' she said. ''The angst is gone, and it feels great.''  Research by Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist, shows that human beings have the cognitive capacity to accommodate only four to six close friends. These are the people in the top tier of your social network, for whom you have the greatest affinity and affection and who require daily or weekly interactions to maintain. Included in that group is typically your romantic partner and maybe a couple of family members.  Lower in the hierarchy are friends in whom you invest progressively less of your attention, and therefore your ties become more tenuous. Without some degree of regular contact, these second- and third-tier friends can fall into the realm of acquaintance. Given that we have limited time and emotional energy, social networks are a zero-sum game. Add a friend, and another one inevitably drops in the ranking.  ''Sometimes you fall out with people, or you just find somebody else to substitute in that slot,'' Dr. Dunbar said. ''The pandemic is likely sharpening the decisions we make about who we really like and dropping those who we like if there's nobody else.'' All those incidental or convenient friends have likely evaporated, and you're left to ponder who is actually important to you.  To be sure, there is a lot of churn in human social networks even in the best of times. Several studies show we replace as much as half of our social network every five to seven years. Little wonder when research also shows only half of our friendships are mutual. That is, only half of those who we think are our friends feel the same way about us. It just normally takes us a while to figure that out.  The pandemic has only accelerated our rude awakening. When every interpersonal interaction becomes a risk-benefit analysis, you discover pretty quickly how committed you and the other person are to the relationship. A lot of situational relationships -- friends we've made through work or our kids' schools and sports teams -- have fallen by the wayside.  And maybe that's OK. ''Once you don't have those external forces making your contacts frequent, then you start realizing, 'You know what? We really didn't have that much to talk about,''' said Mario Luis Small, a professor of sociology at Harvard University who studies social ties. '''And come to think about it, we haven't actually confided anything deeply personal outside of that particular context.'''  Billy Reid, a clothing designer, said he lost contact with people during the pandemic with whom he doesn't intend to reconnect. It reminds him of the time after Sept. 11, when he packed up his company and moved to Florence, Ala., to be near his wife's family. ''The awareness of mortality definitely gives you a confidence, an affirmation or maybe an excuse to decide this person is important to me and this person is not,'' he said.  But recognizing that someone is important and reaching out are only the first steps. Maintenance is where we generally fall down on the job when it comes to relationships and why so many people felt as if they were left without a chair when Covid made the music stop.  William Rawlins, a professor emeritus of interpersonal communication at Ohio University, has interviewed people from age 4 to 100 about friendship and discovered that people have similar expectations when it comes to their friends: We want those who are there for us, who listen without judgment and understand what we're going through. They may not agree with us, but they get us.  ''People remain friends to the extent they are fulfilling each other's expectation of the relationship across the life span and, I would say, across Covid,'' Dr. Rawlins said. ''We need to cross-examine ourselves: Who have we kept in touch with during the pandemic? Who have you taken a risk at a certain point to see because they mean that much to you?''  Friends don't just happen. You have to put in the effort. And part of that is realizing who makes you feel comfortable and connected and who makes you feel pinched and awkward like those stiletto heels or business suits you wore before the pandemic and now wonder how you stood it.  While some are predicting a period of promiscuity and partying akin to the Roaring Twenties after the 1918 influenza pandemic, there's reason to believe history may not repeat itself. Ours has been an era defined by divisiveness, narcissism, frantic busyness and an epidemic of loneliness. The social isolation imposed by Covid-19 has exposed the shortcomings of individualism, incessant striving, superficiality and can't-talk-now-text-me-later lifestyles.  Many, like Ms. Ernst, have a guilty reluctance about things returning to the way things were. ''It sounds terrible, but I've liked the peace that comes with not having to run around,'' she said. ''I've been able to have fewer and deeper friendships, and I want to hold on to that.''  Just as many who lived through the Great Depression continued to scrimp and save even when living in relative abundance, so too might those who survive the Covid pandemic continue to cultivate and conserve close relationships when it's safe to once again swim in the sea of humanity.  As for Dr. Cohen, he said he hasn't looked at his social network much since he created it. ''I have a memory for who is on it,'' he said. ''I realize who I haven't talked to.'' If anything good comes from the coronavirus pandemic, it might be that we keep our friends in mind.  Kate Murphy is the author of ''You're Not Listening: What You're Missing and Why It Matters.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Diana Ejaita FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004c "
218		"   MODERN LOVE  My Boyfriend Has Two Girlfriends  By Silva Kuusniemi  1,609 words 25 April 2021   6     My mind could rationalize polyamory, but my heart rebelled.  I had been wandering the liquor store for some minutes when the clerk approached and asked if I needed help. I considered presenting my situation.  ''Hello,'' I would say. ''I'm wine shopping for dinner with my boyfriend and his two partners, whom I'll be meeting for the first time. You wouldn't happen to stock a white wine that says, 'I'm sorry, please like me?'''  Instead, I said, ''I'm just looking.''  The clerk smiled and ambled away.  Dating someone who was already in established romantic relationships did have its perks. Having already navigated the tricky terrain of polyamory for years, Juhana was an excellent communicator and emotionally literate -- a stark contrast to monoamorous men I had dated before. Also, I didn't want to surrender time from my projects or friends, so it was a relief to have the relationship constrained to specific days of the week: Mondays and Thursdays, when Juhana's live-in partner had regular plans.  On these days I would sometimes visit the apartment they shared, an airy flat in a woodsy suburb of Helsinki, where the windows overlooked a sea of trees. There, Juhana would cook for me. He was the type who shopped for flavored salts at specialty stores and sharpened his own knives, which he would use to mince and crush garlic into paste.  I could tell he was proud of this skill, as if it was something that marked adulthood proper, acquired just beyond a bridge that I, at 27, had yet to cross.  [ Sign up for Love Letter, our weekly email about Modern Love, weddings and relationships. ]  Though his partners weren't there, they weren't entirely absent, either. We ate our tofu burgers at a table between his live-in partner's self-portraits and his second partner's plants, which, arranged in a messy line, extended their branches at me, wilting.  Between bites, Juhana told me his partners had made fun of him for talking so much about me. ''They asked if I'm planning to bring you over for dinner soon. To show you off.''  I flew past the question with a light laugh. My intentions weren't very serious. I doubted that Juhana's partners and I would ever meet.  Until one day when he looked up at me from the armchair in my room, where he liked to sit and read, and said: ''Damn, I suppose I'm falling in love with you.''  As if his words were a chemical catalyst, my visions of our relationship began to metamorphose from restaurant outings and casual trips to us building a home.  These visions invariably did not feature his partners, who were becoming increasingly difficult for me to ignore. They popped up in conversation. Pictures of them dominated Juhana's phone. Sometimes one of them would call while he was with me and, after some conversation, he would lower his phone and say, ''She says hello.''  I stared back at his expectant face, mute. What could I say? ''Hi, I don't know you, but I am in bed with your boyfriend. I fantasize about him leaving you. I am jealous. I wish you didn't exist.''  Saying anything else felt disingenuous, so I said nothing. Gradually, since their well-meaning messages went unanswered, they stopped.  I often wondered what was wrong with me. Excepting some religious texts -- and the romantic literature that populated my bookshelf -- where was it universally decreed that a loving relationship could only involve two partners? Tentative research suggested children raised in stable ''polycules'' fared well. People in open marriages gave optimistic, enlightened interviews. Statistics on cheating seemed to support the notion that humans, much like the vast majority of the animal kingdom, were not ''rigged'' for exclusivity.  Although my mind accepted this reasoning, my heart -- propelled by the Austens and Brontës of my bookshelf -- rebelled.  Why had the polyamorous community rephrased the rush of falling in love as ''new relationship energy'' (NRE for short)? Why would anyone endeavor to rebrand love into something like a start-up, complete with its own energized, abbreviated lingo? And how could Juhana encourage me to pursue other relationships? Did I truly inspire so little emotion he wouldn't care if I dated someone else?  ''I am willing to endure the discomfort,'' he would reply, ''because you are worth it.''  But why couldn't he be willing to endure the discomfort of depriving himself of someone else? Why, I wanted to know, was one pain fundamentally more acceptable than the other?  I subjected Juhana to painful conversations and many meltdowns during which I would demand that we break up, that he break up with his partners, and that he not break up with his partners -- often within the same conversation.  After a particularly turbulent week, as we lay emotionally spent on my futon, I asked Juhana what his partners thought about me. He hesitated.  ''Well, mainly they are just happy we found one another,'' he said. ''But they are a little more wary now. They are afraid that maybe you are manipulative.''  I reprised all the ideas I had of myself -- adventurous, open-minded, creative. It stung to have Machiavellian added to that list.  ''I think I would like to meet your partners,'' I said. ''Maybe we could have that dinner sometime? I'll bring the wine.''  ''They prefer white,'' Juhana said. He knew, given the choice, that I would opt for red.  Which is how I ended up in that liquor store, staring through gleaming rows of bottles imported from Chile and South Africa. My situation felt like another foreign country, in whose territory I had stumbled, felt stupid, and gotten lost.  I imagined the dinner. Would they circle each other's waists as they fetched plates from the kitchen? Would they face me in a row, as if for an interview? Would his partners wear lipstick, laugh at my jokes, serve dessert? Would they, as in my recurring nightmare, slowly look me over and turn to Juhana, as if to ask: ''Her?''  Afterward, I would try to cobble together an understanding of what it all meant, and what I wanted. Maybe I would understand what love really was -- whether it meant holding on or letting go.  You see, there was a period early in our relationship when Juhana questioned whether he was polyamorous after all. Perhaps the intensity of his feelings, his single-mindedness, meant something. ''If I were free,'' he would say, ''would we be exclusive?''  He toyed with this idea for weeks, expressing hope that a lightning bolt of clarity would at some point galvanize him into making a choice. But no such miracle came.  Juhana was religious where I was not. I thought often about how he said he sometimes struggled with his faith, but ultimately, daily, made the choice to believe.  Why, I wondered, wasn't this choice also applicable to love?  In the end, the dinner never happened. A tentative date was set and then postponed because of a scheduling conflict with his second partner. Christmas came and went. I broke up with Juhana and drank the wine I had bought for the dinner. White peach, apricot, Netflix, heartbreak.  Weeks later, we spoke. Juhana had come to the conclusion that the disposition for poly- or monoamory was something innate, like sexual orientation. Perhaps it was even genetic, the way monogamous prairie voles and their promiscuous cousins, the meadow voles, had differing amounts of oxytocin emitters or vasopressin receptors in their brains.  ''We just wouldn't have worked out because we are too different,'' he said. ''I am polyamorous, and you are monoamorous. It's not anyone's fault.''  But my own love seemed less like something grounded in science and increasingly like a faith. It wasn't that I couldn't love multiple people simultaneously, but that I wouldn't. Not because I thought it was ethically wrong or impractical or too difficult, but because it was sacrilegious to the idea of love I possessed.  Where polyamory recognizes the beauty of a pantheon of partners with whom you can express different facets of yourself, a monoamorous, monotheistic view elevates one lover above all others.  Disciples of both faiths submit to a degree of suffering: the polyamorous must deal with jealousy, infinite scheduling and complex interpersonal dynamics, and the monoamorous must accept a lack of diversity and newness and the gravity of commitment in a culture of too much choice. Perhaps for those of us who aren't voles, the defining prerequisite for preferring and thriving in any form of relationship is simply to believe in it.  I don't think I would have discovered at the dinner whatever I hoped I would, just as no lightning bolt of clarity ever appeared for Juhana. There are no answers in love, I think. Only choices made in the absence of objective truth.  Silva Kuusniemi, a mobile game designer in Helsinki, Finland, is working on a novel.  Modern Love can be reached at modernlove@nytimes.com.  To find previous Modern Love essays, Tiny Love Stories and podcast episodes, visit our archive.  Want more from Modern Love? Watch the TV series; sign up for the newsletter; or listen to the podcast on iTunes, Spotify or Google Play. We also have swag at the NYT Store and two books, ''Modern Love: True Stories of Love, Loss, and Redemption'' and ''Tiny Love Stories: True Tales of Love in 100 Words or Less.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Brian Rea FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004b "
219		"   MINI-VOWS  When Tech Talk Fizzles, Try Politics  By Gabe Cohn  766 words 25 April 2021   11     Lisa Vedernikova and Harry Khanna changed each other's lives for the better. But their very first exchange was less than promising.  Lisa Vedernikova divides her personal history into two eras: ''Before Harry'' and ''After Harry.''  Before Harry, she kept her life mostly to herself, prioritizing her work, she said, often at the expense of her social life.  After Harry, she began to find joy in everyday acts, like making dinner. Come evening, she might choose a wine bar meet-up over a memo.  This is all despite the fact that the very first exchange between Ms. Vedernikova, 26, who is the chief of staff to the publisher and chairman of The new_york_times, A.G. Sulzberger, and Harry Khanna, 35, an independent lawyer and a voter protection software engineer for the Democratic National Committee, was, it has to be said, rather awkward.  The couple met in November 2017 at an engagement party at Fedora, a snug restaurant in Manhattan's West Village. (The restaurant closed last year.) Mr. Khanna saw Ms. Vedernikova standing at the bar. He knew he wanted to talk to her, but he didn't know what to say. So he said the first thing that came to his mind. Unfortunately, it was this sentence: ''You seem like you'd be good with computers.''  The line ''didn't go over super well,'' Ms. Vedernikova said. Their exchange was brief. Soon, Ms. Vedernikova wandered elsewhere.  But Mr. Khanna was determined. ''I just felt like I needed to get to know her better,'' he said. So, toward the end of the night, as Ms. Vedernikova was getting ready to leave, Mr. Khanna gave it one more shot. He asked Ms. Vedernikova whether he could buy her a drink. Her response was less than promising.  ''I was like, 'it's an open bar,''' Ms. Vedernikova recalled.  Still, she agreed to have the drink with Mr. Khanna. Their conversation roared to life when they got onto the subject of politics. Ms. Vedernikova had worked on Hillary Clinton's 2016 presidential campaign, and she and Mr. Khanna had a hearty debate about whether Donald Trump would win re-election in 2020. By the end of the night, they had exchanged phone numbers.  There was a barrier to their budding relationship: Mr. Khanna lived in San Francisco. He moved there from New York about a year and a half earlier, and had only returned to New York for the weekend of the engagement party. So in the weeks after meeting, he and Ms. Vedernikova communicated primarily over text message.  When Ms. Vedernikova's birthday came at the end of November, Mr. Khanna was the first to text her a celebratory message -- even though he was on West Coast time.  The relationship grew quickly from there. The following January, Mr. Khanna made an excuse to visit New York again. He and Ms. Vedernikova met for dinner. When he returned to San Francisco, their regular text message exchanges turned into daily phone calls. That March, they traveled together to Iceland. They started discussing the idea of Mr. Khanna relocating to New York so they could be together, with the goal of an April or May move. Mr. Khanna couldn't wait; he surprised Ms. Vedernikova by moving back to New York before the end of March.  Before he met Ms. Vedernikova, Mr. Khanna had been ready to put New York City behind him. He had been employed at a law firm there, and had grown tired of ''working 100 hours a week and going to the handful of restaurants in the Financial District over and over.'' When he moved back to be with Ms. Vedernikova, he said, she introduced him to a ''whole new magic of the city.'' The couple was engaged at the beginning of March 2020. They committed to a March 2021 wedding, which they stuck with even as it became clear that they would have to plan around the pandemic. ''At some point we just had to say, 'this is the one constant in an extremely uncertain process,''' Ms. Vedernikova said.  They ultimately held a socially distanced ceremony with about 40 guests on March 13 at the Gurdwara Mata Sahib Kaur, a Sikh temple in Glen Cove, N.Y. Bhai Paramjit Singh led a traditional Sikh ceremony, which was familiar to Mr. Khanna, but was a new experience for Ms. Vedernikova.  ''The first Indian wedding I had ever been to,'' she said, ''was my own.''  Lisa Vedernikova, Harry Khanna (PHOTOGRAPH BY LAUREN LARSEN STUDIO)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0004a "
220		"    Learning to Live With Germs  By Markham Heid  2,884 words 25 April 2021   4     The health of our bodies and microbiomes may depend on society's return to lifestyles that expose us to bacteria, despite the risks.  The video is intended to comfort and reassure, but it feels undeniably dystopian.  A person clad in goggles, a mask and a reflective vest dusts a plane's cabin with a fine mist of disinfectant. The chemical spray is charged with ''breakthrough'' electrostatic technology that helps it coat every surface and lay waste to any microscopic threats that may be lurking, specifically the coronavirus.  United Airlines produced and uploaded this particular video last April, but the sanitization regimen is not unique. Mass transportation authorities and countless businesses have gone to similar lengths in an effort to abide by guidelines and to mollify a rightly fearful public. And for the most part, the efforts have been welcome. One of the top comments posted to the United video reads, ''Even after this pandemic you guys should keep this up.''  For more than a century -- since scientists first learned that unseen germs cause infection and illness -- we've tended to think of sterile environments as the safe ones. And at the start of the outbreak, when we didn't know any better, it was sensible to disinfect as much as possible, including our groceries, clothing and personal spaces.  It took time for coronavirus researchers to figure out that the risk of surface transmission is low -- the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention only recently pegged it at generally less than one in 10,000 -- and that masks, physical distancing and ventilation are our most-effective safeguards.  Despite the now consensus recognition that air transmission, not surface spread, is more important, most pandemic sanitation practices have continued. We continue to annihilate every microbe in our midst, even though most are harmless. The New York City subway, for example, has been undergoing a 24-hour cleaning protocol that includes ultraviolet light and a variety of disinfecting solutions. Survey data shows most subway riders feel safer because of it.  But some health experts are watching this ongoing onslaught with a mounting sense of dread. They fear that many of the measures we've employed to stop the virus, even some that are helpful and necessary, may pose a threat to human health in the long run if they continue.  Their worries center on the human microbiome -- the trillions of bacteria that live on and inside our bodies. They say that excessive hygiene practices, inappropriate antibiotic use and lifestyle changes such as distancing may weaken those communities going forward in ways that promote sickness and imperil our immune systems. By sterilizing our bodies and spaces, they argue, we may be doing more harm than good.  In January, a global consortium of health researchers published a paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) in which they raise the alarm about the microbial fallout that may follow in the pandemic's wake. ''We're starting to realize that there's collateral damage when we get rid of good microbes, and that has major consequences for our health,'' says B. Brett Finlay, first author of the PNAS paper and a professor in the department of microbiology and immunology at the University of British Columbia.  Almost everything we know about the microbiome is uncertain, including how our activities and environments influence its makeup. But Dr. Finlay and others argue that our collective health may depend on our willingness to holster our sanitizers and cleansers, moderate our use of bacteria-slaying drugs, and resume old habits that nourish our microbial communities. In other words, we're going to have to live with germs again.  *  The world and just about everything in it, including people, are awash in microbes. Bacteria blanket our surfaces, suffuse the air we breathe and saturate certain areas of our bodies, especially the gut. While some microbes and other microscopic particles are a threat to us, a vast majority are benign. And there's mounting evidence that our health relies on our early and ongoing interactions with them.  Dr. Graham Rook, an emeritus professor of medical microbiology at University College London, likens the immune system to a computer. He says that the microbes we encounter in daily life -- on other people and in our spaces -- are the data that the immune system relies on to program and regulate its operations.  Deprived of these exposures, especially at the start of life, the immune system is prone to malfunction. The result can be allergies, asthma, autoimmune disorders, obesity, Type 2 diabetes and other chronic medical conditions.  The ''hygiene hypothesis,'' introduced in 1989 by the epidemiologist David Strachan, first made the case that bodies deprived of contact with microbes could be at risk for health problems. The hygiene hypothesis has evolved over time, and experts continue to debate many of its finer points. But it's now clear that exposure to ''good'' bacteria is necessary for a person's health, and that living in too-sterile environments may threaten us in ways scientists are only just beginning to grasp.  Before the pandemic, there was growing recognition among both doctors and the public that aspects of modern life may be upsetting our balance of healthy microbes, perhaps especially in our guts, and hurting our health as a result. This idea is not so much controversial as simply too new to be fully appreciated; roughly 95 percent of the published microbiome scholarship has come in just the last decade, and two-thirds of it only in the last five years. But already, research has revealed that, apart from training the immune system, our bacteria produce molecules that affect the workings of our every cell and organ.  ''The microbes we carry in our gut could affect the function of the brain, the spinal cord, the joints or things far from where those microbes live,'' says Dr. Eran Elinav, another of the PNAS paper's authors and a principal investigator at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel.  While the gut microbiome has thus far garnered the most scientific attention, humans have other reservoirs of microbes -- on our skin, in our lungs, maybe even in our brains -- that also seem to perform crucial jobs, from strengthening tissues to influencing the function of our heart and hormones. While scientists don't know exactly how these tiny communities form and work, or how much people's environmental exposures influence them, researchers know enough to recognize that indiscriminately killing microbes could have irreversible consequences.  There's some conjecture that the imbalance or loss of good microbes may heighten a person's susceptibility to infection -- including, perhaps, to the coronavirus. Late last year, researchers based in Hong Kong observed a link between certain microbiome characteristics and severe Covid-19. Experts have hypothesized that unwell gut microbiomes may partly explain why older adults and adults with conditions such as obesity or Type 2 diabetes seem to be at greater risk of serious Covid-19 illness. There's even some speculation that microbiome factors play a part in so-called long Covid -- the brain fog, fatigue and other persistent symptoms that afflict many in the aftermath of the infection.  ''There's a wealth of evidence to suggest the microbiome has an influential role in our response to viral infections,'' says Brent Williams, an assistant professor in the department of clinical pathology and cell biology at Columbia University. This raises intriguing questions about how the microbiome might influence disease outcomes for Covid, he says, ''or how it might be altered by Covid, and whether those alterations persist.''  *  The picture that's emerging is that the human body, much like a rain forest, is home to a vast and symbiotic ecosystem of organisms. When that ecosystem is disrupted, there are consequences.  ''We can look at many of the things we're doing now to prevent infection and see how this could have major effects,'' says Dr. Finlay.  Topping the list of concerns, he and others say, is our injudicious use of powerful antibiotics -- drugs that can kill some pathogens but can also wipe out healthy bacteria in the body. A recent analysis found that during the first six months of the pandemic, among the hospital admissions studied, more than half of Covid-19 patients received antibiotics even in situations where the benefit of those drugs was uncertain.  Lance Price, a professor at George Washington University's Milken Institute School of Public Health and the founding director of the Antibiotic Resistant Action Center at George Washington, says that as doctors have figured out how best to treat the coronavirus, antibiotic use has dropped. But, he says, ''Even before the pandemic, we know that half of antibiotic use was inappropriate.''  In addition to antibiotic overuse, Dr. Finlay says that ''hyper-hygiene'' is, quite literally, overkill. ''Wiping down or spraying every surface with antimicrobial agents gives people comfort, but it's probably not doing much to protect us from Covid,'' he says.  Hygiene zealotry not only deprives people of interactions with helpful bacteria, but it may also be driving some essential microbes into extinction. ''We really don't know what effect all this hyper-hygiene and hyper-cleanliness will have,'' Dr. Finlay says. ''This is the biggest experiment in a century, and unfortunately we have more questions than answers.''  While improper antibiotic use and excessive sanitization are two threats to our microbes that we can probably dispense with now, some other pandemic safety measures involve thornier risk-reward trade-offs. In the months to come, the health of our microbiomes may partly depend on the willingness of those who are vaccinated and at low risk to take off their masks and intermingle with one another, as we all used to do.  ''A lot of things people do when they're together that we didn't use to think about -- shaking hands or embracing, kissing or hugging -- these sorts of sociocultural practices could play a part in the exchange of microbes,'' says Tamara Giles-Vernick, another of the PNAS paper's authors and a medical anthropologist at the nonprofit Pasteur Institute in Paris.  Already, there's been some debate about whether people should eventually ''go back'' to shaking hands or congregating indoors in large numbers. These sorts of interactions undoubtedly expose people to pathogens. And as we learned last year, ditching them would most likely help to spare us the worst of the cold-and-flu season. But it's also possible that abandoning these customs, and spending more time isolated from one another, could deprive us of contact with healthy microorganisms.  This idea is controversial. ''I've always felt that people don't do enough to prevent cold and flu, and so in a sense many of these changes have been healthy,'' says Jo Handelsman, an infectious-disease researcher and professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. She says it's unclear whether shaking hands or spending time in crowded places meaningfully contributes to microbiome health, and so avoiding such risky practices may be all upside -- a view that many infectious disease experts share.  The microbiome scientists all acknowledge the gaps in the research. But they say that what is known about the importance of our microbes should caution us against major changes to the ways we live and interact.  While experts are concerned about the threat the pandemic poses to our microbiomes, they all say it's difficult to offer succinct, universally appropriate advice for how to behave. A person's age, health, location, vaccination status and other variables all change the risk-reward equations.  ''The general public always wants a straightforward answer, but in an evolving situation like this, we're going to have to learn to be more nuanced about things,'' says Marsha Wills-Karp, chair of the department of environmental health and engineering at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. ''I'm married to an infectious disease physician, and he and I don't always agree on what's appropriate.''  In this moment, when so much of the population remains unvaccinated and at risk, she says that people must continue to wear masks and follow physical distancing directives. It's also prudent to wash or sanitize hands, especially before eating.  ''But trying to sterilize everything and create these artificially germ-free environments is probably not essential,'' she says. ''And for the people close to you, if you're both vaccinated, I think it's OK to get close again and hug.''  Undoubtedly, many will struggle to resume their old prepandemic habits. ''Things that used to feel normal are initially going to feel weird and uncomfortable,'' says Michelle Newman, an anxiety specialist and professor of psychology at the Pennsylvania State University. ''Even to me, the thought of getting on a plane or going to a big conference feels more intimidating.''  But she says re-engaging with our old lifestyles will help quell any attendant anxieties. ''If you associate a situation with discomfort, the more you put yourself in that situation, the easier and more comfortable it will become,'' she says.  For those who aren't yet able to mix and mingle -- and right now, that's most of us -- there are other ways to support microbial health. ''If you want to do something proactive right now, I would put eating a healthy diet high on your list,'' says Dr. Emeran Mayer, a professor of medicine, physiology and psychiatry and co-director of U.C.L.A.'s Cure: Digestive Diseases Research Center. He says that plant foods (legumes, greens, whole fruits, a variety of vegetables), as well as fermented foods, support the richness and diversity of the gut microbiome. So, too, does limiting one's intake of processed and fast foods, especially those that contain added sugar.  Other healthy habits like exercise and getting adequate sleep are all supportive of microbiome health. Gardening, hiking and other interactions with nature may be especially beneficial.  ''The more we learn about our relationships with the microbial world, the clearer it is that we are connected to them and to the rest of the natural world,'' says Brendan Bohannan, a professor of environmental studies and biology at the University of Oregon. ''Getting outside and exposing ourselves to microbes beyond our indoor spaces may have many positive impacts.'' Such exposure, he notes, might even counterbalance any negative effect that extended indoor stays might be having on our microbiomes.  *  For politicians and health officials, the great challenge of the pandemic has been weighing the immediate threat of the virus against the many detriments (social, economic, psychological, developmental) that accompany business and school closures, distancing imperatives and other measures intended to slow its spread. The longer the pandemic lasts, the more these collateral concerns start to feel like primary ones.  While there is much we can do, and much we can stop doing, to strengthen our microbial communities without exposing ourselves to undue risk, experts say that convincing a rightfully skittish public is a tall order. As this pandemic has made clear, all people are walking and coughing vectors for infectious disease. In the United States and elsewhere, there are also long-held and deeply embedded sociocultural norms that prioritize hygiene and denigrate dirt and bacteria. Meanwhile, technology has made it easier than ever for us to live and work in isolation.  When he educates people about the importance of intermingling with microbes, Dr. Finlay likes to point out that our bodies contain at least as many bacterial cells as human cells. He also emphasizes that, before the pandemic, only one of the top 10 causes of death in America -- influenza -- was attributable to an infectious disease that someone could ''catch.'' Nearly all the rest, such as heart disease and stroke, cancer, brain disease and diabetes, are associated with poor microbiome health or dysfunction.  ''You can't change your genes, but you can change your microbes,'' he says. ''They're our friends.''  He and other experts will continue to work to raise awareness about the importance of bacteria and the microbiome. But for many people, only the passage of time and the suppression of the coronavirus will assuage fears of hidden pathogens.  ''What I'm most worried about after this pandemic has passed is that people will be nervous about being exposed to microbes, and so they won't interact with other people and with the world,'' says Dr. Bohannan. ''That's totally understandable -- we're all going to be traumatized by this. But like a storm, this will pass. And after the storm we're going to need to go outside and be with each other again.''  Markham Heid is a health and science journalist who writes regularly about the microbiome and human health. His work has appeared in Time, Popular Mechanics, Everyday Health, Sports Illustrated and elsewhere.  Photographs by Maisie Cousins for The new_york_times.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAISIE COUSINS FOR THE new_york_times) (SR4-SR5)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00046 "
221		"   BIG CITY Private School Parents and Diversity's Limits  By Ginia Bellafante  1,505 words 25 April 2021   3     In the wake of George Floyd, elite institutions have tried to check their privilege. Not everybody is on board.  In the way that college football grinds the Southeast to a halt on any given fall Saturday, a private-school drama in New York flattens the attentions of the city's moneyed class for anything else, days on end. In this regard, it has been quite a season. Within a period of roughly 92 hours during the week of April 11, the news coming from the Ivy League training grounds hit observers with the pace of an angry linebacker tearing in from the blindside.  Here now, we were introduced to Andrew Gutmann, author of an enraged letter -- sent through the mail and postmarked from New Jersey -- to hundreds of families at Brearley, the Upper East Side girls' school where his daughter was enrolled and where changes were making him very grumpy. Mr. Gutmann, the founder of something called the Institute for Finance Education and Career Advancement, who had once run an apparel wholesaler, was going to pull her out, he explained to many people who surely did not care. Brearley -- a school with mandatory Latin, a ninth-grade experience full of Shakespeare and Jane Austen -- was too busy ''gutting'' its curriculum and appeasing an ''anti-intellectual mob.''  Thanks to Fox News and all the other outlets dedicated to the notion that elite liberal institutions have abandoned any hope of sanity in the name of social revolution, Mr. Gutmann soon became a minor celebrity on the right -- which might have been the whole point.  There, he was joined by a math teacher named Paul Rossi, who had composed a letter of his own, seemingly to the nation at large, laying out his objections to the way that his employer, the Grace Church School in Lower Manhattan, was going about the business of changing its culture around race. Mr. Rossi's note lacked the hysterical tone of Mr. Gutmann's. It raised valid concerns about the squelching of free thought. But he also took the dubious step of publicizing part of a secretly taped conversation he had with the school's headmaster, George Davison, in which he goaded his boss, as if he were a prosecutor grilling a witness, into acknowledging that the new programming demonized white students.  By the end of last week the conversation turned to the Dalton School, where Jim Best, the widely admired headmaster, announced that he was stepping down, amid conflicting agendas around these same issues. Who could blame him? Things were only bound to become more and more unmanageable.  The roots of all this chaos extend, more or less, to late last summer, as parents from Chilmark to Amagansett laid down their tennis gear, poured their Negronis and banged out angry emails to administrators and trustees, apoplectic that a $55,000 annual tuition might not guarantee that their children would receive in-person daily learning. Once the academic year got underway -- with far more live classroom instruction than the city's public schools -- there were new dissatisfactions to nurture.  The calls for racial parity in the wake of George Floyd's murder demanded a response from institutions that market their enlightenment even as they persist in advancing the privileges of largely rich, white populations. Over the summer, Black alumni and parents at some of the country's most prestigious independent schools took to Instagram to document deeply troubling experiences with prejudice at the hands of teachers, students, families. Many stories came not from the long-ago past but from the annals of recent history. Former Dalton students, for example, relayed anecdotes about white classmates likening Black people to gorillas, about a friend's mother who asked whether ''Black men were really violent.'' On and on went the horror and indignity.  Nearly every private school in the country thus spent the summer scrambling to intensify curriculums and training around race and racial sensitivity, often with the help of diversity consultants whose approach can feel dependent on jargon and contrived simplicities. The revolution was coming, but it would be filtered through the ethos of a re-education camp born on the campus of a business school.  Whether consultants were directly involved or not, it soon became clear that not all parents were on board with the new order. In November, the former newscaster Megyn Kelly announced on her podcast that she was pulling her sons out of their ''woke'' Upper West Side school, which turned out to be Collegiate, serving the intellectually adept since 1628. The breaking point for her was a letter circulating within the community, written by an outside champion of racially progressive education, arguing that ''there's a killer cop sitting in every school where White children learn.'' However hyperbolic, it was hard to miss the irony: there are almost certainly no future cops in the classrooms of Collegiate, only future cabinet members and managing directors at Citibank.  The pushback did not end, however, with those who have had to make on-air apologies for remarks uncritical of blackface. In December, a group of Dalton parents and alumni wrote an anonymous letter to the school community titled ''Loving Concern @ Dalton.'' They worried about ''an obsessive focus on race and identity,'' filling their children's days at school. With remote learning giving parents an opportunity to spy on what their children were getting taught all day, these parents did not like what they were hearing -- ''a pessimistic and age-inappropriate litany of grievances in EVERY class.''  The new programming seemed designed to divide and provoke guilt, they maintained, forcing white children to feel bad about being white. While guilt might seem like a fraught path to reform, it was also the case that these parents weren't the best representatives of a viewpoint challenging the emerging orthodoxies. Their letter was seven pages long, and the sentence ''To be clear, we abhor racism'' did not present itself until paragraph 13. The Brearley dad was an even more appalling spokesman, given his belief that ''we have not had systemic racism against Blacks in this country since the civil rights reforms of the 1960s.''  Private schools find themselves now at an existential moment. Over the past few decades, as they have become dominated by wealthier and wealthier families, they have found themselves more and more beholden to the habits of modern corporate culture, which has had a long love affair with consultants and the outsourcing of difficult problems. Right now there are lots of specialists popping up, eager to capitalize on institutional insecurity around diversity initiatives. One of them, Pollyanna, has advised Dalton, Brearley and also the Grace Church School.  The problem, though, is that consultants often present a blanket approach that fails to recognize the particulars of an institutional culture; the language deployed from one school (or company) to another is scarcely any different. Everything begins to sound as though it has its origins in Oz -- inauthentic and alienating.  Mr. Rossi's letter argued that students and teachers at Grace did not feel free to challenge a new language or ideology. When he did, he was reprimanded for ''acting like an independent agent of a set of principles or ideas or beliefs,'' he wrote. After the letter became public, Mr. Davison, the head of school, put together a committee to bring voices from all sides of the debate together. He asked Mr. Rossi to join, but Mr. Rossi instead chose to leave the school.  In a conversation I had with Mr. Davison last weekend, he was very frank about the imperfect nature of the changes at Grace. ''We were in the process of developing programming faster than they we ever had before,'' he told me. ''Whenever you build something quickly, you don't always see all the pieces. The ones who are going to help you build it the most quickly are the true believers,'' he said. But the truest believers are not always those in the best position to advance change without fear. ''We need to be better at communicating those things. We need to get more opinion.'' The truth, he said, was that most people were on board with the new mission. ''If we were a school in Oklahoma, we might not have the consensus.''  When I asked a high school senior I know about what was missing in his diversity, equity and inclusion training at his private school, he said that often what was left out was ''a basic focus on decency and empathy.'' Kids want to know how to talk to their friends openly, he said, and they just don't want to be jerks.  Email bigcity@nytimes.com; follow Ginia Bellafante on Twitter: @GiniaNYT  A group of Dalton parents and alumni wrote an anonymous letter to the school community expressing concerns about ''an obsessive focus on race and identity'' filling their children's days. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00045 "
222		"   ON THE MARKET  Homes for Sale in New York and Connecticut  By Anne Mancuso and Lisa Prevost  196 words 25 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     This week's properties are four-bedroom homes in Larchmont, N.Y., and Wilton, Conn.  Click on the slide show to see this week's featured properties:  In Larchmont, N.Y.: a four-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bath, 2,414-square-foot, renovated 1934 Tudor, with period details, an open-beamed living room with a fireplace, a formal dining room, a sunroom, a kitchen with a built-in china closet, central air-conditioning, a backyard stone patio and a one-car garage, on 0.11 acres on a dead-end street.  In Wilton, Conn.: a four-bedroom, four-bath, 3,570-square-foot home with an open floor plan, hardwood floors, a fireplace, an eat-in kitchen, an office, a screened porch with dome skylights, a stone patio, an in-ground pool, an attached greenhouse and an attached two-car garage, on two acres.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Matthew D'Alto for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00043 "
223		"   ON POLITICS  Republican Support for Voting Rights Drops  By Giovanni Russonello  1,624 words 25 April 2021   26     A Pew poll shows that the party's voters increasingly oppose measures that would expand access to the ballot.  The political divide in America has grown so deep and so entrenched that it now extends well beyond questions of policy.  People's feelings on how democracy ought to be carried out -- including whether voting should be made harder or easier -- may now be just as likely to be correlated to their political identity as they are to their views on actual political issues.  That is the message coming from a Pew Research Center poll released on Thursday, which finds that Republicans increasingly oppose measures that would expand access to the ballot -- particularly those that former President Donald Trump frequently complained about during the 2020 campaign.  The percentage of Republicans and independents leaning toward the G.O.P. who said that voters should be able to vote early or absentee without a reason plummeted, from 57 percent three years ago to 38 percent in the new poll.  Until the most recent election cycle, when Mr. Trump drummed up opposition to absentee and early voting in an attempt to improve his electoral chances, those methods were largely seen as being at least as beneficial to Republican candidates as to Democrats.  The caving-in of Republican support has driven a drop of eight percentage points in overall support for universal no-excuse early voting. Still, 63 percent of all Americans remain in favor of it.  Republican support for the practice of automatically registering citizens to vote also dropped, to 38 percent, an 11-point dip since 2018. Among Democrats and Democratic leaners, 82 percent said they supported automatic voter registration.  Establishing automatic voter registration and requiring states to hold early voting for at least two weeks are elements of H.R. 1, the For the People Act, a sweeping voting-rights bill that was passed last month by the Democratically controlled House. It would need at least 10 Republican votes to pass in the Senate, support that's unlikely to materialize. Some congressional Democrats are now urging the party's leaders to shift their focus toward a narrower bill, the John Lewis Voting Rights Act, which had initially been proposed as a complement to H.R. 1.  But the Pew poll found that other proposals included in the For the People Act -- like restoring voting rights to felons and making Election Day a national holiday -- did retain the support of a solid majority in both parties, possibly a reflection of the fact that right-wing news media outlets haven't targeted those proposals for attacks as frequently as they have others.  Another particularly popular idea was to make early in-person voting standard (the poll question did not mention whether this kind of voting would be allowed without an excuse). Nearly four in five Americans supported making early voting available at least two weeks before Election Day, including 63 percent of Republicans and nine in 10 Democrats, the poll found.  The survey was conducted among 5,109 adults nationwide via Pew's American Trends Panel, which uses a probability-based model to draw a sample that is representative of the national population.  Liz Cheney vs. MAGA  The regular conference meetings of the Republican lawmakers in the House of Representatives, held most weeks behind closed doors in the Capitol Visitor Center, tend to be predictable and thus irregularly attended affairs. The party leaders -- the House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, the minority whip Steve Scalise and the conference chairwoman Liz Cheney, whose job it is to run these meetings -- typically begin with a few housekeeping matters and then proceed with a discussion of the party's message or issue du jour. The conference's more voluble members line up at the microphone to opine for one to two minutes at a time; the rare newsworthy comment is often leaked and memorialized on Twitter seconds after it is uttered. An hour or so later, the members file out into the corridors of the Capitol and back to their offices, a few of them lingering to talk to reporters.  The conference meeting on the afternoon of Feb. 3 was different in nearly every way. It lasted four hours and nearly all of the G.O.P.'s 210 House members attended. Its stated purpose was to decide whether to remove Cheney from her leadership position.  Three weeks earlier, Cheney announced that she would vote to impeach President Donald Trump over his encouragement of his supporters' storming of the Capitol on Jan. 6 -- one of only 10 House Republicans, and the only member of the party's leadership, to do so. Because her colleagues had elected Cheney to the party's third-highest position in the House, her words were generally seen as expressing the will of the conference, and those words had been extremely clear: ''There has never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States of his office and his oath to the Constitution,'' she said.  The combination of her stature and her unequivocal stand amounted to a clear message from Cheney to House Republicans: If they sided with Trump in challenging the election, they were siding against the Constitution, and against at least one of their elected leaders. The tenor of the Feb. 3 meeting was therefore tense, portentous and deeply personal from beginning to end, according to several attendees who later described it to me.  When it was Cheney's turn to speak, the 54-year-old congresswoman from Wyoming began by describing her lifelong reverence for the House, where her father, Dick Cheney, was minority whip more than 30 years ago before serving as George H.W. Bush's secretary of defense and George W. Bush's vice president. But, Cheney went on, she was ''deeply, deeply concerned about where our party is headed.'' Its core principles -- limited government, low taxes, a strong national defense -- were being overshadowed by darker forces. ''We cannot become the party of QAnon,'' she said. ''We cannot become the party of Holocaust denial. We cannot become the party of white supremacy. We all watched in horror what happened on Jan. 6.''  Cheney, alone among House Republicans, had been mentioned by Trump in his speech that day. ''The Liz Cheneys of the world, we got to get rid of them,'' he told his supporters at the Ellipse shortly before they overran the Capitol. The president had been infuriated by Cheney's public insistence that Trump's court challenges to state election results were unpersuasive and that he needed to respect ''the sanctity of our electoral process.'' At the time of Trump's speech, Cheney was in the House cloakroom awaiting the ritual state-by-state tabulation of electoral votes. Her father called her to inform her of Trump's remark. Less than an hour later, a mob was banging against the doors of the House chamber.  In the conference meeting, Cheney said that she stood by her vote to impeach Trump. Several members had asked her to apologize, but, she said, ''I cannot do that.''  The line to the microphone was extraordinarily long. At least half of the speakers indicated that they would vote to remove Cheney. Ralph Norman of South Carolina expressed disappointment in her vote. ''But the other thing that bothers me, Liz,'' he went on, ''is your attitude. You've got a defiant attitude.'' John Rutherford of Florida, a former sheriff, accused the chairwoman of not being a ''team player.''  Others argued that her announcement a day before the impeachment vote had given the Democrats a talking point to use against the rest of the Republican conference. (''Good for her for honoring her oath of office,'' Speaker Nancy Pelosi pointedly remarked when told of Cheney's intentions.) Likening the situation to a football game, Mike Kelly of Pennsylvania lamented, ''You look up into the stands and see your girlfriend on the opposition's side -- that's one hell of a tough thing to swallow.''  ''She's not your girlfriend!'' a female colleague yelled out. Kelly's remark was immediately disseminated among Republican women in professional Washington, according to Barbara Comstock, who until 2019 served as a Republican congresswoman from Virginia. ''We emailed that around, just horrified, commenting in real time,'' she told me.  Throughout it all, Cheney sat implacably -- ''as emotional as algebra,'' as one attendee later told me. She spoke only when asked a direct question. But when McCarthy concluded by suggesting that they put this matter behind them and adjourn, Cheney insisted that the conference vote on her status right then and there. The members cast their secret ballots, and Cheney prevailed, 145 to 61.  The lopsided margin was almost identical to Cheney's own whip count going into the conference. Individual colleagues had confided in her that most of the conference was only too happy to move on from Trump -- but saying so in public was another matter. To do so would mean risking defeat at the hands of a Trump-adoring Republican primary electorate or even, many of them feared, the well-being of their families. In sum, it risked getting the Liz Cheney treatment.  This is an excerpt from a feature in this Sunday's edition of The new_york_times Magazine. Click here to read the full article.  On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.  Is there anything you think we're missing? Anything you want to see more of? We'd love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Antonio de Luca/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00041 "
224		"   ON THE MARKET  Homes for Sale in Manhattan and Brooklyn  By Sydney Franklin  190 words 25 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     This week's properties are in Yorkville, Midtown and Prospect-Lefferts Gardens.  Click on the slide show to see this week's featured properties:  In Yorkville: a one-bedroom, one-bath duplex with nine-and-a-half-foot ceilings, a sleeping loft, exposed-brick walls, a spiral staircase and a private roof deck, in a five-story 1920 building with a laundry room.  In Midtown: a one-bathroom studio loft in the 19th-century Osborne co-op, with 14-foot ceilings, stained glass, mahogany walls and floors, a Murphy bed, basement laundry and a common roof deck.  In Prospect-Lefferts Gardens: a generously proportioned one-bedroom, one-bath, roughly 935-square-foot apartment, with a foyer, a dining area, five closets and an additional area between rooms that could be used as an office, in a prewar elevator building.  Additional reporting by Kim Velsey.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Katherine Marks for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00042 "
225		"   Reconfiguring the Courts to Meet Health Concerns  By Benjamin Weiser  1,324 words 25 April 2021   4     As New York continues to reopen and pandemic restrictions are slowly lifted, the sprawling federal and state court systems have lumbered back to life, transforming how they operate in order to safely bring people back into buildings and clear case backlogs while infection rates remain high.  Nowhere has the change been more visible than in jury trials.  In Manhattan's Federal District Court, witnesses now testify from Plexiglas booths. Defendants communicate with socially distanced lawyers through telephone-style handsets. And jurors no longer sit in tight rows in an old-fashioned jury box. Instead, they are spaced apart on elevated platforms that reach toward the rear of the courtroom.  Rather than cramming into a tight conference room to deliberate or eat lunch, jurors now receive a separate courtroom in which to spread out. They, like other visitors, pass through rigorous health screenings to enter the court, and they await jury selection in assembly rooms in chairs spaced six feet apart.  ''Our ability to get jurors to serve was dependent upon having an environment that was both safe and perceived as safe,'' said Judge P. Kevin Castel, a member of an ad hoc committee of judges appointed to figure out how to carefully restart jury trials in federal courthouses in Manhattan and White Plains.  The task was not easy. The court suspended jury trials more than a year ago because of the pandemic, then restarted them in the fall and, about two months later, halted them again.  The court spent $1 million to reconfigure 11 courtrooms and to stock courthouses with sanitizer, gloves, masks and even antimicrobial pens, after consulting with experts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and elsewhere, said Edward Friedland, the court's senior executive.  With cases stalled and defendants languishing in jail, the goal was to grant them their right to a speedy trial and get the criminal justice system moving again.  ''There is this thing called the Constitution that's sitting out there,'' said Judge Colleen McMahon, who recently stepped down as chief judge after nearly five years.  Judge McMahon noted that the court had had no difficulty picking juries since restarting trials.  Indeed, for some, jury duty may have been preferable to being quarantined at home.  Judge Loretta A. Preska, overseeing a recent trial in a wage lawsuit filed by former Manhattan noodle shop workers, recalled one juror appearing in a V-neck blouse with large ruffles around the neckline.  ''When I admired it,'' Judge Preska recalled, ''she smiled broadly and replied to the effect that she had been at home for nine months and was delighted to dress to come to court.''  The court decided that, generally speaking, criminal trials would be given precedence over civil cases, and jailed defendants would be tried before those free on bond, court officials said. The court has successfully held more than a dozen trials since restarting them in February.  In New York's state court system, since jury trials restarted on March 22, roughly 200 have been resolved through verdicts, guilty pleas or settlements, a court spokesman said.  There have been some bumps in the road. As jury selection began in one civil case in Brooklyn Supreme Court, a plaintiff's lawyer said he could not proceed while wearing a mask, claiming it was interfering with his breathing. He asked to wear a face shield instead.  Justice Lawrence Knipel, citing court rules statewide, denied the request and dismissed the case. ''Masks must be worn in all courtrooms,'' he said.  In revamping courtrooms, officials confronted issues that have not typically arisen in other settings.  The Manhattan federal court, for example, requires visitors to wear two face masks, or a single N95 or KN95 mask. But the Sixth Amendment's confrontation clause says an accused person has the right to be confronted with the witnesses against him.  So did that mean witnesses had to remove their masks while testifying? In the end, the judges decided yes. But that raised a practical concern: how to protect judges and others who sit near the witness stand.  ''It's challenging because they have a unique set of needs in the courtroom,'' said Amira Roess, a professor of global health and epidemiology at George Mason University, one of two experts there consulted by the court.  The other, Rainald Löhner, a professor of fluid dynamics, studied courtroom air currents by having a court employee sit on the witness stand and puff on an e-cigarette.  ''You just see where the smoke goes,'' Dr. Löhner explained.  The court eventually constructed a Plexiglas booth for witnesses, equipping it with a HEPA filter, which traps fine particles that can transmit the virus.  The court also acquired special telephone-style handsets engineered to amplify whispers to allow defendants and lawyers to communicate confidentially during trials while sitting farther apart.  ''Everybody's very impressed with what they have done with the courtrooms; they've made it as safe as humanly possible,'' said David E. Patton, attorney in chief of Federal Defenders of New York, which represents thousands of indigent defendants in Manhattan and Brooklyn.  But Mr. Patton expressed concern that in some trials, anxious jurors could reach ''quick decisions that might not be fully thought out because people are just stressed and worried about getting home.''  As it turned out, that did not happen in a four-day trial held this month in Brooklyn's federal court, said Christopher Wright, a lawyer for the defendant, a man charged with threatening to shoot his parole officer in the face.  In court, Mr. Wright said, everyone wore masks; jurors sat apart in the former spectator gallery; and witnesses testified from the now-vacant jury box while wearing clear face shields.  The jury acquitted his client after more than three hours of deliberations, Mr. Wright said.  ''I was apprehensive about defending someone during Covid for fear the jury would rush to a verdict to get out of there,'' he said. ''That was not the case, as the jury acted with the same deliberation as they would've in more normal times.''  The new world of Covid-era trials got a bigger test last month in Manhattan's federal court in a three-week trial of two men charged with conspiracy to commit bank fraud.  The judge, Jed S. Rakoff, oversaw the selection of 12 regular jurors and four alternates to serve as backups -- a routine step to ensure the jury remained at full strength. If a jury in a federal criminal trial falls below 12 members, a judge may have to declare a mistrial.  As the trial began, the pool of alternates was rapidly depleted. One alternate was excused on the second day after complaining of financial hardships. Two days later, Judge Rakoff used the second alternate to replace Juror No. 8, who he said had tested positive for Covid-19.  Then, that same day, another juror, complaining that Juror No. 8 had not always properly socially distanced, asked to be dismissed, writing, ''Your Honor, I feel incredibly uncomfortable with the situation.'' Another alternate replaced her.  The judge had to use the fourth and last alternate a week later to replace a juror who said a student in her daughter's school had tested positive.  ''Just lending a little bit of excitement to the proceedings,'' the judge quipped as the trial lurched forward with no alternates remaining.  But the patched-up jury ultimately made it to the finish line when the jury, after nearly six hours of deliberations over two days, returned guilty verdicts for both defendants.  Top, a custom Plexiglas booth with a HEPA filter offers protection for witnesses in Federal District Court in Manhattan. Judge Colleen McMahon, above, said that finding jurors willing to serve had not been a problem despite the complexities of rejiggering courts during the coronavirus pandemic. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CAITLIN OCHS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00040 "
226		"    Larchmont Tudor $1,549,000  By Sydney Franklin, Anne Mancuso, Lisa Prevost and Kim Velsey  134 words 25 April 2021   3     WESTCHESTER 56 Woodbine Avenue  A four-bedroom, three-and-a-half- bath, 2,414-square-foot house with an open-beamed living room with a fireplace, a sunroom, central air-conditioning, a backyard stone patio and a two-car garage, on 0.11 of an acre on a dead-end street. Mary Gail Barry, Compass, 914-715-5835; compass.com  TAXES $35,914 a year  PROS There is a laundry area on the second level and a half-bath on the lower level.  CONS The backyard is small. Reaching the bathroom closest to the main level requires climbing a few steps and passing through a bedroom.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JANE BEILES FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003z "
227		"    Midtown Co-op $1,450,000  By Sydney Franklin, Anne Mancuso, Lisa Prevost and Kim Velsey  117 words 25 April 2021   3     MANHATTAN 205 West 57th Street, No. 4AA  A one-bathroom studio loft in the 19th-century Osborne co-op, with 14-foot ceilings, stained glass, mahogany walls and floors, a Murphy bed, basement laundry and a common roof deck. Ellen Kapit, Sotheby's, 917-620-3445; sothebysrealty.com  MAINTENANCE $3,931 a month  PROS The striking fireplaces and the bathtub are made from large slabs of onyx jade. A residents-only gym is under construction.  CONS The kitchen is small, lacks full-size appliances and could use updating.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATHERINE MARKS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003y "
228		"    Prospect Lefferts Gardens Co-op $499,000  By Sydney Franklin, Anne Mancuso, Lisa Prevost and Kim Velsey  97 words 25 April 2021   3     BROOKLYN 135 Hawthorne Street, No. 5A  A one-bedroom, one-bath, roughly 935-square- foot unit with an additional area between rooms that could be used as an office. Laura Hess, Corcoran, 808-554-5083; corcoran.com  MAINTENANCE $701 a month  PROS There are windows in every room. The bathroom was recently refurbished.  CONS Most of the windows in the apartment face the back of the building.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEFANO UKMAR FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003x "
229		"    Yorkville Co-op $525,000  By Sydney Franklin, Anne Mancuso, Lisa Prevost and Kim Velsey  148 words 25 April 2021   3     MANHATTAN 227 East 87th Street, No. 4B  A one-bedroom, one-bath duplex with nine-and-a-half-foot ceilings, a sleeping loft, exposed-brick, a spiral staircase and a private roof deck, in a five-story building with a laundry room. Sarah Kruse, Corcoran, 805-570-0791; corcoran.com/nyc  MAINTENANCE $908 a month  PROS The bedroom doors open to the deck for fresh air and city views. Though the footprint of each room is rather small, the unit has cleverly organized storage space. The marble tile in the bathroom is stunning, and the building's hallways are updated.  CONS It's on the fourth floor of a walk-up, and the spiral staircase could be challenging for some.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATHERINE MARKS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003w "
230		"    Wilton Four-Bedroom $1,095,000  By Sydney Franklin, Anne Mancuso, Lisa Prevost and Kim Velsey  138 words 25 April 2021   3     FAIRFIELD 160 Catalpa Road  A four-bedroom, four-bath, 3,570-square-foot home with an open floor plan, hardwood floors, a fireplace, an eat-in kitchen, an office, a screened porch with dome skylights, a stone patio, an in-ground pool, an attached greenhouse and an attached two-car garage, on two acres. Hylerie Katzenberg, Compass, 203-246-8395; compass.com  TAXES $13,778 a year  PROS The new kitchen has high-end appliances and a large center island with Paperstone counters and an induction cooktop. All the bedrooms have sliding doors to the yard. The home is close to public schools.  CONS Some bathrooms are dated.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MATTHEW D'ALTO FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003v "
231		"   THE HUNT  Their Shared Life Would Be Easier With an Extra Bathroom  By Joyce Cohen  822 words 25 April 2021   11     Carlye Richter and Tyler Hamblin met through a friend while they were students -- she at Clemson University, he at Columbia. After college, they spent a few years sharing New York apartments with roommates.  But as they approached their late 20s, ''everyone was saying, 'OK, this will probably be our last year living with friends,''' Ms. Richter said.  And sure enough, a year and a half ago, the couple moved to a garden duplex in the West Village. The rent was around $5,000.  ''We had all the issues that come with a street-level apartment,'' Ms. Richter said, including noisy backyard construction.  Mr. Hamblin said: ''You could hear rodents in the ceiling, which was unsettling. We didn't have natural light. It was like a dungeon.''  Eager to move, the couple, both 28, enlisted the help of Kobi Lahav, director of sales at Living New York. They told Mr. Lahav that they wanted a sunny apartment with a second bedroom, a dining nook or a home office in a building that would accept their dog, Javier.  Ideally, it would have outdoor space and a second bathroom, too. They gravitated toward the kind of modern buildings that often have plenty of amenities, although those extras were unimportant to them. Ground floors were out.  Mr. Lahav suggested that they focus on condominiums rather than co-ops, so that it would be easier to keep the place as an investment if they wanted to rent it in the future. Their budget was up to $1.4 million.  They both have centrally located Midtown offices -- Ms. Richter works in accounting at a pharmaceutical company, and Mr. Hamblin works in finance, often commuting by Citi Bike -- but because they are able to work from home, they had little preference as to the neighborhood.  Among their options:  1. Upper West Side Two-Bedroom  This two-bedroom, two-bathroom, interior-facing unit was on a low floor of a double-towered building on Riverside Boulevard that opened in 2008. The apartment was around 950 square feet, with high ceilings and a washer and dryer. The asking price was $1.475 million, with monthly charges of around $2,300.  2. Upper West Side Studio Loft  This studio loft with one and a half bathrooms was on a high floor of a 1991 building, with a tiny terrace overlooking Broadway. The unit was around 860 square feet, with 20-foot ceilings, huge windows facing east and a staircase up to the sleeping level. The building had a laundry room on each floor. The price was $1.295 million, with monthly charges of around $1,800.  3. Upper East Side One-Bedroom  This one-bedroom in a 1987 building was around 860 square feet, with one bathroom, a pass-through kitchen, a dining alcove, a 48-square-foot balcony and a washer and dryer. The price was $1.195 million, with monthly charges of around $2,400.  Their Choice  The Upper West Side two-bedroom was on the high end of the couple's budget, and every room felt small.  The Upper East Side unit was a contender, but Ms. Richter really wanted an extra bathroom, a rarity in a one-bedroom.  They found the Upper West Side studio loft captivating. ''You walk in, and the natural light hits you in the face,'' Mr. Hamblin said. ''The floor-to-ceiling windows -- we couldn't resist that.''  Ms. Richter also couldn't resist the extra bathroom, a powder room on the lower level. The couple offered $1.225 million but faced competition. They got the apartment for $1.275 million.  The two arrived in late summer. Their movers took longer than anticipated, missing the building's daytime move-in window, so they spent their first night on the floor.  They gave up on having their own washer and dryer, settling for a small laundry room on their floor. ''I've never seen anyone else in there using it,'' Ms. Richter said.  The terrace, partly obstructed by a ventilation unit, is used primarily by Javier, who basks in the sun. (They recently adopted a shy puppy, Tula, to keep him company.)  Their view offers a front-row seat over Broadway, with its street life and traffic -- which is louder than expected, with the recent explosion of motorcycle packs.  The couple have had little trouble living without a bedroom door.  ''Granted, the studio thing -- there's the issue with one of us being too loud, but it's nothing crazy,'' Ms. Richter said. ''The one and a half bathrooms is so clutch. The best thing is every morning we have so much sun, and it's beautiful.''  Email thehunt@nytimes.com  The Buyers Carlye Richter and Tyler Hamblin, with Tula, left, and Javier, in Central Park. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE MARKS FOR THE new_york_times); The Options   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003u "
232		"    A Boom, but for How Long?  By Stefanos Chen  1,325 words 25 April 2021   1     Nervous buyers and sellers are asking: 'When is the housing market going to crash?' Here's what to expect this year.  As housing omens go, beware the trending Google search.  In the first week of April, U.S. search interest in the phrase ''when is the housing market going to crash'' jumped 2,450 percent compared to the previous month, and is now more popular than anytime since 2004, according to Google. The search terms ''should I buy a house'' and ''sell my house'' also reached record interest.  Market watchers are right to be wary. The median sale price of an existing home in the U.S. was $313,000 in February, up nearly 16 percent from a year earlier, when a 3 to 5 percent annual increase is considered healthy, according to a report from the National Association of Realtors, a trade group.  ''I think it's what's on everybody's mind,'' said Jonathan J. Miller, a New York appraiser who analyzes markets nationwide. ''How long is it going to last?''  The answer will depend largely on where you live and how the pandemic continues to reorder buyer priorities, but it will hinge on two trends: rising mortgage rates and incredibly tight inventory in some markets, which will likely keep demand strong through the rest of 2021, even as price growth moderates, several analysts said.  What awaits at the end of this frenetic period is not likely to resemble the 2008 housing bubble, which brought on a drawn-out crash when it finally burst, they said. Today's supercharged market has been caused by pandemic forces that have challenged other assumptions about the market. Even as the pendulum has swung toward increased demand in suburban markets, cities, too, are surging.  Nationwide, housing inventory was at a record-low 1.03 million units at the end of February, down 29.5 percent from a year earlier, a record decline, according to the National Association of Realtors.  As a result, homes sold in an average of 20 days, a record speed, when 60 days is typical, said Lawrence Yun, the group's chief economist.  ''It gives the feel of a bubble,'' Mr. Yun said, recalling the run-up to the subprime mortgage crisis that cratered prices after 2008. ''But the fundamental factors are different.''  Unlike the last major housing crisis, in which sale prices plummeted and many buyers were stuck with risky, adjustable-rate financing, today the average 30-year fixed-rate mortgage remains near record lows, lenders rely on stricter underwriting requirements, and homeowners have more liquidity.  ''We don't have the reckless lending that we had before,'' said Mr. Miller, and so even as market conditions get frothy, some may find that they overpaid for their property, but the ebb and flow will be more in line with regular economic cycles.  In the fourth quarter of 2021, Mr. Yun predicts the volume of U.S. home sales to drop 10 percent compared to the year-ago period, as mortgage rates climb closer to 3.5 percent, up from about 2.7 percent at the start of 2021.  He also expects home prices to keep rising in the short term, because of more than a decade of sluggish housing construction, hobbled by restrictive zoning and high labor costs.  Still, the pandemic has affected markets in different ways. In New York City, where commercial real estate was battered and home buyers fanned outward to surrounding suburbs in search of affordability and more space, the sales market fell off at the beginning of the pandemic but appears to have turned the corner.  ''The rate at which homes are selling nationally is not sustainable, but in New York, the uptick is just getting started,'' said Nancy Wu, an economist for StreetEasy, a listing website.  In the week ending April 11, there were 783 new signed contracts citywide, the highest since the company began tracking weekly pending sales in 2019, when the peak was 491 contracts, she said.  Unlike much of the country, New York had a glut of luxury inventory before the pandemic, and prices had been softening since around 2017. From 2018 to the end of 2019, Manhattan saw a roughly 15 percent drop in sale prices, Mr. Miller said. In aggregate, prices have fallen another 5 to 7 percent since Covid arrived, to a median $1.075 million last quarter, and sellers are finally getting more realistic, he said. (One-bedroom apartments, the largest share of apartments sold, closed for a median $760,000.)  The price cuts have been a boon to a broader range of people. First-time buyers made up 41.9 percent of sales in Manhattan last quarter, the highest share in at least seven years, Mr. Miller said. And the share of all-cash buyers fell to 39.3 percent, a seven-year low, which could reflect both favorable interest rates and a shift away from investment buyers.  Even the city's luxury stock, which has seen some of the largest price cuts, is on an upswing, said Donna Olshan, the president of Olshan Realty, which tracks the market at $4 million and above. As of April 18, the city has recorded 11 straight weeks with 30 or more contracts signed in that tier, the longest such streak since at least 2006.  ''It does have the potential to last for a while, because the results are only based on a half-tank of gas,'' Ms. Olshan said, referring to the fact that most of these signings were from domestic and local buyers, as international buyers remain mostly on the sidelines with travel restrictions.  There is already a shift in the mood in the city, as vaccinations progress and buyers anticipate the benefits of the federal stimulus package, said Mark Chin, an agent and the co-head of training at Keller Williams New York City.  ''People that signed contracts even two months ago are absolutely thrilled they did, because the bottom is already over,'' he said.  New York's revival also challenges one of the early assumptions during the pandemic -- that the suburbs would benefit at the expense of big cities, where buyers, untethered from office commutes, could choose to live farther from work.  Instead, a new analysis of Postal Service change-of-address requests shows that migratory patterns since Covid-19 haven't changed as much as some predicted. New York did see a surge in outbound migration, but that was a trend that started before the pandemic.  ''The easy answer was: the city is down, the suburbs are up,'' said Mr. Miller. ''And now it turns out that both are up.''  So far, thanks to limited supply, many suburbs remain in high demand. Fairfield County, Conn., for instance, recorded 3,045 sales last quarter, the most in that period in more than 16 years, along with the lowest inventory in 25 years, according to a report from the brokerage Douglas Elliman.  But with prices jumping close to 20 percent in some outlier markets, Mr. Miller does not expect the gains to continue apace for long, in part because the appeal of many suburbs is affordability, relative to big cities. The extent to which remote work will remain a feature of life after the virus is also still unclear.  ''Manhattan finally joined the party,'' he said, referring to the city's sales turnaround. ''But we're not sure if this is the party we want to be in -- because there's uncertainty about how this plays out.''  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  U.S. home sales and prices are surging, with market watchers wary of a bubble -- but today's market bears little resemblance to the one that fueled the 2008 crisis. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tony Cenicola/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003s "
233		"   SOCIAL Q'S  A Toy Gun Dilemma  By Philip Galanes  956 words 25 April 2021   8     A reader worries that allowing her sons to play-fight in the yard sends the wrong message to neighbors.  My husband and I disagree about whether toy guns are appropriate for our kids and under what circumstances they may be used. Last weekend, our two young sons were given water guns as gifts, which they quickly put to use outdoors. They played with the toy guns as if they were real -- shouting ''Bang!'' when they fired them and collapsing onto the ground when they were hit. I'm afraid that even toy guns send a message of insensitivity to our neighbors during this time of persistent mass shootings. My husband disagrees, and the boys continue to use the guns outdoors. Am I overreacting?  MOM  I respect your desire to be a good neighbor. But in your quest, you seem to have skipped over the bigger question here: Should your sons be playing with toy guns at all? You may not have bought them -- and your husband may find them harmless -- but that doesn't settle the matter.  Personally, I don't think anyone should become desensitized to the act of pointing a gun at another person (even if the gun is made of chocolate). Life and limb are precious! I also acknowledge, though, that as a young boy my brother turned practically any item he picked up -- pencils, carrots, action figures -- into a make-believe gun, and nothing my parents said stopped him. Play is complicated.  Take another crack at explaining your concerns about gunplay to your husband. Wouldn't the boys have just as much fun with water balloons? If you can't agree, you and your husband should have a serious talk with your sons about guns. Set some firm ground rules for using the water guns, starting with: You may never leave the yard with them, and you may never point them at anyone without their permission.  As for sensitivity to your neighbors, again, look homeward. If you think the boys are old enough, start with a family discussion where you invite them to share what they know (and how they feel) about mass shootings. Then take it from there. An age-appropriate conversation about gun violence and the steps we can take -- even in play -- to make everyone safer may improve the situation on your lawn.  Not Even a 'Get Well Soon'?  I live in a gated community. Some of us women started a monthly get-together to share recommendations and details about upcoming events. A month ago, I suffered a heart attack one Saturday morning. I'm sure my neighbors saw the ambulance and fire truck in our driveway! On my return from the hospital, only two of the 40 members of the group contacted me. (Some of them now ignore me when they walk past my home.) I have gone out of my way for many of these women. I know enough not to blame myself, but I don't know what to do with my disappointment. Am I being a Karen?  ANONYMOUS  I'm sorry your neighbors haven't lived up to your expectations. Don't underestimate the distancing effects of the pandemic and, more likely, your neighbors' desire to respect your privacy about a health crisis. You don't mention telling anyone about your heart attack.  If you want to talk about it, bring it up. As for neighbors who ''ignore'' you now, I suspect that some are unsure about broaching the subject of your illness. I'm not blaming you for your feelings. But neighbors walk a fine line between support and discretion. By raising the subject yourself, you can help them land on the side you prefer.  Where Dogs Rule  A few years ago, I was attacked by a dog. It permanently disfigured my leg. I've since moved to a city where attitudes toward dogs are comparatively lax. Owners let their dogs off-leash in areas where it's illegal. I've been growled at by aggressive dogs. And last week, a large dog jumped on me -- while it was on a leash. The owners playfully scold their dogs or assure me they're friendly. Meanwhile, I'm forced to relive the trauma of my attack. I bite my tongue and move on rather than yell at strangers. But I'm tired of avoiding parks and yielding to unruly dogs. Your thoughts?  MELANIE  Dog owners are always responsible for controlling their dogs in public. Unfortunately, though, authorities are seldom around when owners fail to behave properly. So, I suggest a middle ground between biting your tongue (useless!) and yelling at people (which can needlessly escalate problems).  Say directly, but not angrily: ''Please get your dog under control. I don't want contact with it.'' Careless owners may think you're a meanie, but responsible ones will know you're right and appreciate the warning.  The Missing Invite  I've been going out with a guy for almost three months. Things seem to be going really well. So, I was surprised that he didn't invite me to Easter dinner with his family. I've been edgy about this, but I haven't said anything to him. Should I?  AMIE  It's always nice to be included. But ''almost three months'' is very brief in the grand scheme of things. If I were you, I'd let Easter slide. Focus on deepening your relationship, and see what happens on the Fourth of July.  For help with your awkward situation, send a question to SocialQ@nytimes.com, to Philip Galanes on Facebook or @SocialQPhilip on Twitter.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Christoph Niemann FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003o "
234		"   CALCULATOR  When the Sick Must Stay Inside  By Michael Kolomatsky  416 words 25 April 2021   2     A new census study reveals how poorly prepared American homes were when the coronavirus forced us inside.  Before 2020, ''quarantine suitability'' wasn't exactly high on the list of what people looked for in a new home. Now, as the coronavirus pandemic pushes deeper into its second year, a report by the U.S. Census Bureau reveals that millions of multiperson American households were unequipped from the start to effectively quarantine a household member infected with Covid-19,  Pandemic guidelines outlined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend practices we've become familiar with, like maintaining a six-foot distance from others and limiting social contacts. Inside homes, the C.D.C. advises that features such as in-unit laundry and adequate kitchens are desirable to limit outside interactions. If a household member does become infected, isolation in a separate room and the use of a separate bathroom are among the primary recommendations for successful quarantine.  But the Census Bureau reported this month that 38 percent of multiperson households in the U.S., about 34 million in all, were found to lack enough bedrooms or bathrooms to meet those guidelines. In two- and three-person households, two bedrooms were considered enough to allow a sick member to isolate in one of them. Homes were considered deficient if three members would need to share a room.  Among the 15 largest U.S. metro areas, expensive ones like New York, Boston and Los Angeles -- where more roommates were likely to be sharing apartments with fewer rooms -- had the highest percentage of households that were unable to meet the guidelines. Not surprisingly, the study also found that the poorer the household, the more likely its home fell short of the minimum bedrooms and bathrooms.  Among racial groups, multiperson American Indian and Alaskan Native households had the highest share of unequipped homes, followed by Pacific Islander, all-Black, mixed race, all-white, and Asian households.  New York City's predominantly older housing stock, typically built with a single bathroom, played a role in the area's ranking as the least equipped in the U.S. This week's chart shows how the 15 largest U.S. metro areas ranked according to failure to meet C.D.C. guidelines for quarantine.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003r "
235		"    Jake Paul, Behind The Scenes  By Taylor Lorenz  2,699 words 25 April 2021   1     A look behind the scenes at life in the Team 10 house.  In the vast world of YouTube villains, there may be none as famous as Jake Paul.  The 24-year-old Vine star turned vlogger has polarized viewers with videos of dangerous pranks and stunts (though he continues to bring in millions of views). He is a serial entrepreneur linked to several dubious and misleading business ventures (though that hasn't deterred investors). He has repeatedly offended and alienated his collaborators (though he keeps finding new ones). In 2020, he declared the coronavirus a ''hoax.'' It can often seem that he lives to provoke outrage.  Now, Mr. Paul is facing allegations of sexual misconduct from other influencers.  Yet he remains the blueprint for many social media stars today. Without him, it's hard to imagine the current land rush of so-called ''collab houses,'' where young content creators film videos, throw parties and spur drama. Or the proliferation of prank videos on YouTube. Or the bad-boy archetype embodied by so many influencer-entrepreneurs born on TikTok.  At the center of these comparisons is the Team 10 house, an influencer collective and talent management agency founded by Mr. Paul in 2016. The vision: He and six other creators, aged 14 to 19, would live together and leverage their collective followings for views and cash. Everyone would benefit, but no one more than Mr. Paul.  ''I know it's a cliché, but, like, literally, I want to create an empire of dozens of talent under me, to take my power and multiply it so that I become bigger than myself,'' Mr. Paul told The new_york_times in 2017.  Back then, the arrangement was uncommon; sure, influencers lived together (the O2L house and The Station had already come and gone), but the houses weren't all businesses in their own right. Now, such setups are increasingly common -- and highly lucrative.  ''People look to Team 10 house as the inspiration for collab houses today,'' said Brendan Gahan, the chief social officer at Mekanism, an advertising agency. ''The Beatles didn't invent rock 'n' roll, but they're the most famous rock 'n' roll band. Team 10 didn't invent the collab house, but they became the most famous collab house and really defined it. They created the culture.''  But that culture is now being re-evaluated, as stories mount from creators who say they were exploited for views.  No Rent, No Parents ... No Problems?  When AJ Mitchell received a direct message from Jake Paul in early 2016 about an opportunity in Los Angeles, he was intrigued.  An aspiring musician in small-town Illinois, Mr. Mitchell had earned more than 80,000 followers on Instagram. Mr. Paul, who was raising capital to start a media company focused on influencers, said he could help him become much bigger.  Aaron Mitchell, AJ's father, said he ''was not very impressed with Jake'' and that he didn't want his son, who was 14 at the time, involved with Team 10. However, after extensive conversations with Mr. Paul's parents, Greg Paul and Pam Stepnick; Mr. Paul's assistant, Erika Costell, who was in her mid-20s; and Neels Visser, another member of Team 10, he and his wife, Allison, decided to allow AJ to join the group.  The arrangement worked like this: Each of the influencers could live in the Team 10 house (a rented mansion in the upscale Beverly Grove neighborhood of Los Angeles) for free if they agreed to produce regular content for social media (which Mr. Paul would monetize) and participate in brand deals. (Mr. Paul declined to comment on the financial arrangement he had with house residents.)  According to several former house members, Mr. Paul could also take 10 to 20 percent of Team 10 members' YouTube ad revenue for up to five years, even if they left the group. At the time, it sounded like a good deal; Mr. Paul would help them become stars in their own right.  On May 24, 2016, Mr. Mitchell arrived at the Team 10 house with a single suitcase. For several weeks he didn't have a bedroom, so he slept on a leather couch in the living room.  Mr. Mitchell was given a room to share with Alissa Violet, who was 19 at the time and publicly dating Mr. Paul. ''It kind of felt unreal,'' Mr. Mitchell, who is now 19, said. ''I'd seen those people on social media before, growing up. I'd see all these funny videos so when I went out there I was like, 'Whoa, this is real.' It was like I was living in a dream.''  Ms. Mitchell, AJ's mother, would regularly fly in and stay at a nearby hotel. On some occasions, she even spent the night at the Team 10 house, sleeping in the room her son shared with Ms. Violet. ''For me, as a mom, I'm very protective of my kid,'' Ms. Mitchell said.  She said that when she called older members of the group to check on her son, they assured her that things were going well; AJ, she said, never let on otherwise.  ''All I know is they were doing a bunch of silly stupid videos, being kids,'' Ms. Mitchell said. ''Sometimes being reckless, but doing silly videos.''  The Prank Economy  To get views, many YouTubers, including Mr. Paul and David Dobrik's Vlog Squad, relied on pranks and practical jokes, drawing from a lineage of entertainment franchises like ''Jackass'' and ''Punk'd'' as well as the work of creators like Mr. Paul's older brother, Logan. The people living and working in the Team 10 house served as subjects for all kinds of antics.  Mr. Paul's YouTube channel offers an incomplete record -- many of his videos have been removed -- but it includes footage of members of Team 10 being electrically shocked without warning and facing pressure to jump from the mansion's roof into a pool. The videos give the impression of a rollicking frat house during rush season rather than a collaborative work environment.  Former Team 10 members told The Times that Mr. Paul once chain-sawed through a bedroom door to wake up two people in the house. One of Mr. Paul's former assistants recalled arriving for work to find her desk had been smashed for a video. The Times sought comment from Mr. Paul on the material of the YouTube videos and the accounts of former Team 10 associates, and he declined.  It wasn't just people in the house who were affected by Mr. Paul's pranks: In 2017, a man sued Mr. Paul for hearing loss after the influencer blared a car horn at him; the case was later dismissed.  ''When it comes down to someone having to do something to get attention, every single day you have to do crazy stuff,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''If you go back and look at those videos, you see a lot of crazy stuff and you'll see why kids are drawn into it, because it was a house full of kids doing whatever they want. Every day it was a new crazy thing, but people wanted to watch it.''  In his downtime, Mr. Mitchell would write songs in a notebook and play them on his keyboard. One day, he came home to discover his keyboard broken. Mr. Paul told him it had been thrown in the pool for a video.  'He Was the Boss'  Followers were the primary currency of the Team 10 house. ''If you got tagged in one of Jake's YouTube videos, you could get 50,000 followers,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''Jake would use that to manipulate everyone. If anyone didn't do what Jake wanted, he'd tell everyone else in the house not to tag them. Jake had a monopoly, and he decided who got famous.''  But there was money coming in, too, and members of the group had questions about where it was going. When Team 10 formed, Mr. Paul set up and controlled business email accounts for each member to solicit opportunities. Mr. Mitchell said he was not aware of the opportunities that he was being pitched for or what was coming in. In the 14 months he spent as part of the group, he said he was paid directly for two brand deals but never received payment from Team 10.  Mr. Mitchell relied on small amounts of money he received from his parents to cover expenses like meals out with the group. Mr. Paul had convinced Mr. Mitchell's parents that their son would be taken care of, but no meals or structure were provided for him or the other teenage residents. Most of them had never been expected to shop or cook for themselves, and didn't have the means to do so.  ''People see these mansions and they see people living like royalty, but no one knew I was sleeping on the floor or I didn't have food,'' said Mr. Mitchell.  Veena Dubal, a professor of law at the University of California, Hastings, said: ''We have all these laws in place that have been around for a century to protect child performers, but they have not been extended to safeguard the health, welfare and safety of children influencers.''  Because these young creators make money through a variety of revenue streams, and are not employed by a single entity, they can be vulnerable to exploitation. ''If there's not some entity taking responsibility as an employer, then we're going to see the kind of exploitative and unsafe practices that we have been seeing,'' she said.  The allure of living independently and building a following had worn off. ''At first I was like there's no parents here and we get to be free and do what we want,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''I felt, like, free in a way. But having Jake be the adult was weird because we all listened to Jake. He was the boss.''  During parties, marijuana and alcohol were available in the Team 10 house. Mr. Mitchell said he once drank so much that he blacked out.  The group often attended parties where guests in their 20s and 30s would mingle with teenagers. Mr. Mitchell said he began a sexual relationship with a woman nearly a decade older than him whom he had met at an influencer party. He understands now that the relationship could not have been consensual given his age.  ''I was a baby. I had a baby face,'' he said. ''I feel like that's just weird now.''  Behind the Scenes  By late 2016, Mr. Mitchell had left the Team 10 house, though he remained part of the group for several months after. His mother, who was staying at a hotel nearby, had found out about a party at the house and drove over to pick up her son.  It wasn't until recently that Mr. Mitchell told his parents the full extent of what took place in the house. Ms. Mitchell said she is horrified and angry. ''I'll tell you right now, had I known anything about any relationship with a girl 10 years older than him I would have had the law involved,'' she said.  Several months after Mr. Mitchell's departure, the rest of Team 10 was forced to move; neighbors said Mr. Paul had created ''living hell'' for them and turned their sleepy neighborhood into ''war zone.''  The following year, Ivan and Emilio Martinez, two YouTubers from Spain who had lived in the Team 10 house, spoke about their decision to leave. In a YouTube video, they said Mr. Paul bullied them, terrorized them with pranks and made racist comments mocking their background and language skills. (The two speak English as a second language.)  In a 2018 interview with the YouTuber Shane Dawson, Ms. Violet described what it was like to date and work with Mr. Paul. ''He's not a physical abuser, but mentally and emotionally, 100 percent, every day, 2,000 times a day,'' she says in the video. ''I can't even remember a conversation where it was me walking away feeling good about myself.''  ''If we filmed a video, and he had to push me into a bush, normally, you'd nudge someone or pretend to push someone. He would actually shove me,'' she says, as she shows scars to the camera. ''He would just do it way too hard.''  In a YouTube video posted on April 9, Justine Paradise, a 24-year-old TikTok influencer, accused Mr. Paul of sexual assault. The incident, she said, involved forced oral sex and took place at the Team 10 house in 2019.  ''In a situation like that, there was nothing I could do,'' Ms. Paradise said. ''I was physically restricted, and I felt emotionally restricted afterwards to even say anything about it.'' Three friends whom she told directly afterward about the incident corroborated her account. Ms. Paradise said she plans to file charges.  In a public statement posted to Twitter, Mr. Paul denied Ms. Paradise's allegations, calling them ''100% false.'' Mr. Paul's lawyer Daniel E. Gardenswartz, said in a statement to The new_york_times: ''Our client categorically denies the allegation.''  Railey Lollie, 21, a model and actress who began working with Mr. Paul when she was 17, said he often called her ''jailbait'' and commented on her appearance. She said that one evening in late 2017, after filming a video, Mr. Paul groped her. She forcefully told him to stop, and he ran out of the room.  Ms. Lollie quit shortly after the incident. ''I was with Jake for months, and I saw what kind of person he was behind the scenes and what kind of person he put out to the rest of the world,'' she said.  Meanwhile, in Businessland  In the business and entertainment worlds, the name Jake Paul continues to have cachet. In March, Mr. Paul announced he was starting a new venture fund; already, powerful figures in Silicon Valley have agreed to contribute to the fund.  ''These older investors come in who have no idea about social media and they see he's got a lot of followers. From their perspective, it's success,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''The real story is, Jake should not be getting any money from investors from the things he's done in the past.''  Mr. Paul, who was an athlete in high school, began a boxing career in 2020. ''It brought back the competitive, athletic Jake Paul,'' he told Rolling Stone recently.  Fighting has helped Mr. Paul expand his audience. It has also made him richer: In an interview with ESPN last year, Mr. Paul said he earned ''eight figures'' for a fight against Nate Robinson, a former N.B.A. star. For his most recent fight, against Ben Askren, a former mixed martial arts champion, Mr. Paul's disclosed pay was $690,000. (After the fight, Mr. Paul wrote in an Instagram post that the fight had drawn 1.5 million pay-per-view customers.)  Where other YouTubers, like David Dobrik and James Charles, have faced financial fallout after accusations of misconduct, Mr. Paul has yet to see such consequences. ''If Jake's sponsors and investors don't hold him accountable, then why would he change any of his actions?'' Ms. Paradise said.  Top, Jake Paul at the weigh-in for Miami Fight Night and, above, at the event in January 2020. Top right, Alissa Violet, a former member of the Team 10 house who had a relationship with Mr. Paul. Center, AJ Mitchell, who joined the house when he was 14 and trying to become a musician. At first, he said, ''it was like I was living in a dream.'' Above right is a triple bunk bed for guests at the team's mansion in the upscale Beverly Grove neighborhood of Los Angeles. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERIC ESPADA/GETTY IMAGES; ALBERTO E. RODRIGUEZ/GETTY IMAGES; TODD MIDLER FOR THE new_york_times; MICHAEL REAVES/GETTY IMAGES; JAKE MICHAELS FOR THE new_york_times) (ST7)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003p "
236		"    What Can You Do With Unvaccinated Kids?  By David Leonhardt  1,859 words 25 April 2021   8     There will be more than one reasonable way to approach the risks of family activities.  Many families will soon face a complicated choice about how quickly to resume their prepandemic activities.  More than 50 percent of American adults have already received at least one Covid-19 vaccine shot. At the current pace, virtually all adults who want to get vaccinated will have been able to get a shot by July. Yet relatively few children, especially younger children, will have been vaccinated by then. While the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine may be authorized for children ages 12 to 15 as early as next month, younger children appear to remain months away from being eligible for any vaccine.  What should those families do this summer and next fall, as they consider sending children to day care, seeing relatives, socializing with friends, eating in restaurants or traveling on airplanes?  The answers will not be easy. Families will make different decisions based on their preferences. There will be more than one reasonable approach.  Some parents will choose to keep their children largely away from indoor social situations until vaccines are available for them. These parents will point out that some children have died from Covid-19, while a few thousand others have contracted a rare inflammatory condition. These parents will also rightly say that many things about Covid remain mysterious.  Future variants could cause more severe effects in children, and the long-term effects of Covid-19 are unclear. A cautious approach may be especially sensible for families in which the children have underlying health conditions or some adults have chosen not to be vaccinated.  But other parents will be more willing to resume many parts of normal life before all of their children have been vaccinated. And those parents will be making a decision that is as scientifically grounded as the more cautious approach.  I recognize that some readers will be skeptical of this argument. Many Americans have now spent 13 months in some version of lockdown, and imagining a return to normalcy can be as uncomfortable as it is exciting. Perhaps even more important, parents feel intensely protective about their children and are often happy to endure inconveniences or worse to protect their children from any danger.  Unfortunately, there is no risk-free option available to parents in the coming months. Keeping children at home -- away from their friends, activities, schools and extended family -- can also harm them, as multiple studies have suggested.  ''It's really important to look at a child's overall health rather than a Covid-only perspective,'' Dr. Amesh Adalja, a pandemic expert at Johns Hopkins University, told me. Keeping children isolated is particularly fraught for lower-income parents, because it forecloses child-care options and can keep them from working a normal schedule.  Any decision about family life over the next several months will have to involve weighing one set of dangers against another. My goal here is to walk you through the risks that Covid poses to children.  As a comparison, let's start with its effect on adults. For them, Covid-19 has exacted a brutal toll, one large enough to warrant the shutdown of much of daily life. The disease has killed about 16 times more Americans than the flu would in a typical year.  Nationwide, Covid-19 was the third-leading cause of death in 2020, after heart disease and cancer. Even for adults who are only in their 30s, Covid-19 has meaningfully increased the dangers of everyday life: It appears to have been the fifth most common cause of death over the past year, after accidents, suicide, cancer and heart disease -- and ahead of murder, liver disease, diabetes and every other cause.  But Covid's effect on children has been fundamentally different from its effect on adults. For children, Covid looks much more like the kind of risk that society has long tolerated, without upending daily life.  ''For the average kid, Covid is a negligible risk,'' Dr. Aaron Richterman, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Pennsylvania, told me. Dr. Richterman added that he would not upend his family's life to avoid every possible exposure to children.  To put this in perspective, I worked with experts and colleagues to compile data comparing Covid-19 with influenza in recent years. The underlying numbers come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They are necessarily incomplete, because not all cases of Covid or the flu are diagnosed. But academic researchers have published work that estimates the number of undiagnosed cases, which makes the comparisons meaningful.  Consider that Covid-19 has killed fewer than 450 Americans under the age of 18, which is fewer than a flu season often does. The flu can be deadlier for children than Covid has been, even though most children receive a flu vaccine. While some of the new coronavirus variants may be more severe, the difference is not big enough to change any of the fundamental comparisons. ''It's very unusual for kids to get very sick,'' Dr. Rebecca Wurtz of the University of Minnesota said.  The low toll of Covid-19 on children is not just because millions of them have largely stayed at home over the past year and avoided getting the virus. Among those children who have contracted Covid-19, the death rate still looks similar to the death rate from the flu:  These numbers offer a reminder that influenza is a serious disease. In an average year, it kills about 35,000 Americans, which is nearly as many deaths as are caused by gun violence. The flu's toll is worse for Black, Latino and Native Americans, as is the case with Covid.  Still, the flu does not upend most children's lives. They go to school when the flu is circulating. Americans have understandably decided that keeping children away from their classrooms, day care centers, friends, relatives and activities would bring a larger cost than shielding them from the flu. And Covid-19 appears to present a smaller risk to children than many flu seasons.  ''For people under the age of 18, Covid is really not that big of a risk,'' said Stephen Kissler, a researcher at Harvard's T.H. Chan School of Public Health. ''I do think of it as on par with the risk from flu.''  It's also helpful to put Covid-19 in the context of other risks that children face. About twice as many children drown in a typical year as have died from Covid-19 over the past year. About five times as many die in vehicle accidents. If protecting children from small but real risks of serious harm were society's top goal, keeping children away from pools and cars would probably have a bigger effect than isolating them in coming months.  There is also evidence that Americans are exaggerating Covid's risks to children. When a large survey by Gallup and Franklin Templeton asked people to estimate the share of Covid deaths that have occurred among people under age 25, the average answer was 8 percent (and Democratic voters tended to give higher estimates than Republican voters did). The actual answer was 0.1 percent. By contrast, Americans badly underestimated the share of deaths among people over age 65.  Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins, told me that she viewed decisions about children's activities as a matter of personal choice that different parents would make differently. In her family, she said she was worried about how a year of pandemic life had hurt her children, by making them less comfortable in social situations. Once all the adults are vaccinated, she plans to restart more activities.  ''I can accept the risks of my kids getting Covid, in part because I compare it to the risk of them getting other infectious diseases and the risk seems very, very small,'' Dr. Nuzzo said. ''I feel that if my kids were to get Covid, they would be OK. I also see the direct harms of their not having a normal life.''  Of course, many parents aren't worried only about death or hospitalization with Covid-19. They are also anxious about chronic long-term effects, like potential neurological or cardiac damage. This is a murkier area -- and arguably the best case for treating Covid exposure as different from flu exposure. There is a reason scientists use the term ''novel coronavirus'' to describe this virus: It's new. We don't yet know what its eventual effects will be.  Already, some people have suffered from a condition known as long Covid, with protracted fatigue and other symptoms. A recent study published in Nature Medicine found that 2.3 percent of Covid patients had symptoms that lasted for at least 12 weeks.  Still, it is worth remembering that some of the focus on these long-term symptoms reflects the current attention on all things Covid. The chronic effects of Covid may well be worse than the chronic effects of familiar illnesses, like the flu, but it is not yet clear how much worse. One academic study found that up to 10 percent of people who contracted influenza later developed myocarditis, or cardiac inflammation.  For children, the evidence so far does not offer much reason for alarm about Covid-19's long-term effects. They are much less likely than adults to contract virtually every worrisome version or symptom of the disease.  So what should your family do once the adults in it are vaccinated? Until all adults have had a chance to receive a shot, experts recommend caution, because children can spread the virus. Even after that, some basic safety measures will make sense, Dr. Nuzzo points out. They include wearing masks when in close contact with people who may not be vaccinated and avoiding situations that offer little benefit but a meaningful risk of infection. Taking children to a crowded, poorly ventilated restaurant, for example, seems questionable.  But it's important to keep in mind that acting in the best interests of children is not the same thing as minimizing Covid risk. ''Everything has risk,'' as Dr. Adalja of Johns Hopkins said. For more than a year, many Americans have reordered their lives because of the extreme danger of Covid-19. And Covid continues to dominate our thinking. Whether it should dominate our children's lives is a different question.  David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) writes The Morning, The Times's main daily newsletter. Previously at The Times, he was the Washington bureau chief, the founding editor of The Upshot, an Op-Ed columnist, and the head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003n "
237		"    Self-Promotion Has Its Rewards  By Kate Dwyer  1,217 words 25 April 2021   4     The artist Richard Prince appropriated her image for his work. Now she's doubling back on it for one of her own.  In an effort to re-establish ''authority'' over the usage of her likeness, Emily Ratajkowski, the model and writer, is minting a nonfungible token, or NFT, which will be auctioned at Christie's on May 14. The piece will be titled ''Buying Myself Back: A Model for Redistribution.''  As Ms. Ratajkowski chronicled in a widely read essay published in The Cut last fall, she'd been surprised to find out, in 2014, that a nude photograph of herself was hanging in the Gagosian Gallery on Madison Avenue. As part of his ''New Portraits'' series, the artist Richard Prince had taken one of her Instagram photos and printed it on a large canvas, priced at $90,000.  Ms. Ratajkowski tried to buy the piece but a Gagosian employee bought it for himself. After contacting Mr. Prince's studio directly, though, she was able to obtain a second ''Instagram painting'' of herself, featuring a photo from her first appearance in Sports Illustrated's swimsuit issue. She had been paid $150 for the shoot, she wrote, and a ''couple grand'' when the issue was published. She and her boyfriend at the time bought the piece for $81,000; when they broke up, she paid her ex $10,000 for a smaller ''study'' that Mr. Prince's studio had given her.  The image attached to the NFT is a digital composite showing Ms. Ratajkowski, photographed in her New York apartment, posing in front of the Richard Prince painting that hangs in her Los Angeles home. (To remind: a nonfungible token is the metadata associated with the image file, allowing the file to be bought or sold like a physical piece of art.)  Instead of cash-based currency, NFTs are purchased using cryptocurrency like Bitcoin or Ethereum, and the transactions are permanently recorded on the respective currency's blockchain, which functions like a ledger. Ms. Ratajkowski is using the platform OpenSea to add her NFT to the Ethereum blockchain, but her NFT will be for sale in U.S. dollars, and the fund transfer will happen ''off-chain,'' a Christie's spokeswoman said. There is no reserve, or starting, price on the piece.  In March, after the artist Beeple's $69.3 million NFT sale at Christie's, talent agents started encouraging their celebrity clients to participate in the NFT ''money grab,'' Ms. Ratajkowski said in an interview. Brands and cryptocurrency brokers contacted her directly, she said, offering her 20 percent to 60 percent of profits for an NFT featuring her likeness. ''I had this bad feeling in my stomach about that way of approaching it,'' she said, so she decided to develop her own project -- following another prominent model, Kate Moss.  As Ms. Ratajkowski browsed NFT marketplaces like OpenSea, Foundation and SuperRare, she came across bouncing smiley-face GIFs and 3-D renderings, thinking to herself: ''Why are they NFTs? They don't need to be NFTs.''  Because an NFT is less about the image itself and more the concept of ownership over a digital file, Ms. Ratajkowski realized the medium could be an effective way to make a statement about ownership -- by appropriating Mr. Prince's appropriation of her photo.  ''As somebody who has built a career off of sharing my image, so many times -- even though that's my livelihood -- it's taken from me and then somebody else profits off of it,'' she said. Every time her NFT is resold, she will receive an undisclosed cut. ''To me, this digital marketplace is a way to communicate this specific idea that couldn't exist in a different way.''  Mr. Prince, who did not respond to messages sent through Gagosian and his studio manager, has been using other artists' work in his own work since the 1980s, and he made a name for himself by taking photos of existing photographs. His work has long been controversial, and Ms. Ratajkowski is not the first subject to take issue with the ''New Portraits'' series of Instagram appropriations.  In 2015, Selena Mooney, the founder of the erotic website SuicideGirls, sold $90 copies of a piece by Mr. Prince that features one of her Instagram posts, with proceeds going to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital rights group.  ''If I had a nickel for every time someone used our images without our permission in a commercial endeavor I'd be able to spend $90,000 on art,'' Ms. Mooney wrote on Instagram. Another subject, the sex educator Zoë Ligon, told Artnet she felt ''violated'' by Mr. Prince's use of her selfie in 2019.  Mr. Prince has also been sued at least five times over copyright infringement relating to the ''New Portraits'' series, The new_york_times has reported, including two high-profile lawsuits filed by two photographers, Donald Graham and Eric McNatt. Mr. McNatt claimed that Mr. Prince misused a photo of Kim Gordon he shot for Paper magazine. According to court documents, he was paid between $50 and $100 for the shoot.  The art critic Jerry Saltz, who called ''New Portraits'' ''genius trolling'' in a 2014 review, worked with Kenny Schachter, an artist and art-world gadfly, to produce an NFT of the disputed Kim Gordon image in early April. Ms. Gordon chimed in and wrote that she wondered if Mr. McNatt ''will sue you too?'' on Mr. Schachter's Instagram post.  Casey Reas, an artist and professor at the University of California, Los Angeles who has dealt in NFTs for five years, noted they could be of particular appeal to content creators, whose images are so often replicated far beyond their control.  ''With things in the physical, material world, ownership is pretty clear, but with digital files, it's always been sort of a fuzzy area,'' he said. ''NFTs allow one person to have clear, public ownership over a digital thing, like an image or a video.''  However, those pieces of media can still go viral. ''The work itself is not scarce,'' Mr. Reas said. ''That image can still circulate around the internet, but ownership is the thing that the NFT allows somebody to claim.'' Like a physical painting, the original artist still retains copyright; unlike a physical painting, every time an NFT changes hands, the original artist gets royalties.  To Ms. Ratajkowski there's another potential dividend: moral justice. She said that after her article was published, models started reaching out to discuss ''not just their image being used, but their bodies being misused, and used for profit in ways they didn't consent to,'' she said, a topic she explores in an upcoming essay collection, ''My Body,'' which Metropolitan Books is planning to publish in October. Across fashion, film and the art world, she added, young women are made to ''feel like they don't need to be paid properly.''  And she said cryptocurrency experts warned her: ''People are going to use your image in NFTs in one way or another, so you might as well make one.''  Brands contacted Emily Ratajkowski, above, about an NFT. She said, ''I had this bad feeling in my stomach about that way of approaching it.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMILY RATAJKOWSKI)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003l "
238		"   FASHION REVIEW  Kors Gives His Regards To Broadway  By Vanessa Friedman  807 words 25 April 2021   4     And gives his regards to Broadway for his 40th anniversary collection. Burberry flies the flag.  New York fashion is throwing its weight behind the return of New York City.  Just one week after the Metropolitan Museum of Art announced that its next big costume show would be devoted to American designers, Michael Kors held an actual show -- one marking 40 years in business -- using 45th Street as a runway, the lights of Broadway as a backdrop and a cast of supermodels past and present to make a bet on the future of the metropolis in double-face cashmere and crystals.  Forget ''The Bonfire of the Vanities.'' Get ready for ''the bonfire of the sweatpants.''  ''The other day we were at Balthazar for dinner again,'' Mr. Kors said in a socially distant one-on-one presentation the day before the video bowed, ''and just walking to the bathroom was an event! We've been missing that head-turning moment. But I think the 'entrance' is going to return.''  To that end, his show was not just a show, but also a P.S.A. for the theater community (Mr. Kors is a famous theater buff, attending an average of three shows a week in prepandemic times) and a statement of belief in the allure of perfectly polished power sportswear.  It began at Sardi's, the classic theater eatery, where the cartoon portraits of stars including Bette Midler, Billy Porter, Debra Messing and Matt Bomer suddenly came to life and started bickering, riffing, praising Mr. Kors and chatting up the Actors Fund, which has been focused on helping the less heralded denizens of the theater survive during the pandemic closures.  Then Shalom Harlow exited the restaurant in a white tuxedo jacket, black shirt and black trousers, began to sashay down the middle of the street, and a parade of greatest hits began.  As Rufus Wainwright crooned ''City Lights'' and ''New York State of Mind'' on the stage of the Shubert Theater, out came luscious camel halter-necks and ivory body-conscious knits; windowpane-check miniskirt suits, giant zebra sheepskin parkas and boss lady suiting. Mr. Kors has always had the ability to make an apparently simple garment -- a knee-length skirt slit up each thigh just so, a jacket tossed over a shoulder -- look ineffably expensive (it's his superpower), and that skill was on full display.  Indeed, 16 looks from the archives were remade as part of the collection, including a lipstick-red patent leather car coat originally worn by Cindy Crawford in 1991, now modeled by Bella Hadid atop a matching red turtleneck sweater dress. It all culminated in gold and silver mirrored T-shirt dresses and tank gowns; posh puffers lined in faux fur and sequins; and a gray flannel tailored jumpsuit pinstriped with Swarovski crystals.  You want to know what people are going to wear to the Met Gala come September? Here's your answer.  And Mr. Kors was not the only designer getting ready for The Return. In London, Riccardo Tisci presented his first solo women's collection for Burberry (since he joined the brand in 2018, he has always shown men's wear and women's wear together) in the environs of the brand's Regent Street flagship. It was sort of a statement of belief in the potential of shopping: We will go out to browse again!  And when we do, what will we see?  ''I believe after lockdown we all want to dream,'' the designer said, speaking via videoconference from Italy, where he was visiting his 92-year-old mother. ''But dressed up doesn't have to mean uncomfortable.''  That meant a spoken word performance by the British rapper and D.J. Shygirl, wearing a flesh-toned bodysuit and musing on ''Mother Nature.'' It meant graphic color-block silk dresses inspired by deconstructed flags (national, heraldic, you name it) and jigsawed together in asymmetric patterns and layers; chubby faux fur coats dangling fat rabbit's-ear fringe at the hem; narrow tailoring with an added panel, like a cape, at the back; fringed leather and jersey covered in small hammered-gold discs, like very sinuous armor.  Despite some inexplicable flaps on trench coat lapels and trouser hems -- seriously, what is it with the flaps? -- the result was a tighter, more streamlined presentation than Mr. Tisci has given for the brand. Less mired in British heritage and the desire to be all things for all people, and more like what you might want to wear to a futuristic jousting tourney.  Well, that could be what city streets look like next.  From left, the supermodels Carolyn Murphy, Helena Christensen and Naomi Campbell, back on the ''runway'' for Michael Kors. Far right, a Burberry look. (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA MICHAEL KORS COLLECTION; VIA BURBERRY)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003m "
239		"   LIVING IN  The Draw of Historic Homes and Cultural Riches  By Julie Lasky  2,132 words 25 April 2021   10     The Mercer County town has long attracted affluent professionals who take on long commutes in return for the charming setting and top-rated schools.  After living in Manhattan for 25 years, Donna Fay decided to create a new kind of life in 2019, in Princeton, N.J.  Ms. Fay, a licensed aesthetician who advises people on how to look their best ''from the clavicle up,'' moved with her baby son from the Upper East Side into a house with parts dating from the early 1700s. The property, which sits on the edge of Mercer County, 10 minutes from the center of town, included a carriage house, a cottage, a tennis court, a pool and a paved courtyard. And while some might have been daunted by the upkeep of its almost eight acres, Ms. Fay, 49, said she was born on a farm and had ''no problems getting on a lawn tractor and cutting grass.''  She went so far as to credit others' maintenance phobias for the bargain she got. (Public records indicate that the sale price was $2.1 million and that, at one point, the property was listed for $4.5 million.) ''People nowadays don't want so much acreage,'' she said.  Well, that was then. After a year of lockdown, one imagines many would be happy to follow her on the back of a lawn tractor. But the number of available properties of any size in Princeton has plummeted. As of April 19, only 73 homes were on the market, of which 17 were listed for less than $1 million, said Martha Stockton, a second-generation real estate agent who descends from one of the town's founding families. ''There are usually an average of 125 listings this time of year,'' Ms. Stockton said.  Princeton packs many charms into its 18.4 square miles. Halfway between New York and Philadelphia, it has long attracted affluent professionals, many enduring commutes of more than an hour in return for roomy, historic houses, old-growth trees that burst into flower in spring and the cultural riches of Princeton University.  Jeffra Nandan, an educator, and her husband, Yash Nandan, a sociologist, moved to Princeton in 1971 because Mr. Nandan insisted on access to a decent research library, and the university has several, which it makes available to the public. (Frank Gehry designed the latest, the Lewis Science Library, which opened in 2008.) The couple raised two children in the community, and still live in the same house.  ''It's a highly educated town, with people who value education,'' Ms. Nandan, 73, said. ''The school system is wonderful. That's one of the reasons we never moved.''  John James Jenkin, 54, an executive of the furniture company Kartell, arrived in 2008 because he was relocating his family to the United States from northern Italy and couldn't imagine his provincial children surviving the New York City subways.  ''I came here on a Sunday and looked around,'' he said. ''I liked the place. It was small, quiet and very New England'' -- an Italian's way of describing quaint old buildings and manicured greenery.  The children have since grown up and returned to Europe, but Mr. Jenkin and his wife became attached to a knot of international academics and corporate professionals. ''Ninety-nine percent of our friends are from Europe,'' Mr. Jenkin said. He's staying, too.  ''It's not a sheltered little private bedroom community anymore,'' said Gerri Grassi, a vice president of Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices, Fox & Roach Realtors. She dates the transformation to the last two decades, when a number of multinational (especially pharmaceutical) companies moved to Princeton's fringes, diversifying the cultural mix. Among the 3,900 students attending Princeton's public schools, 22 percent speak a first language other than English; it might be Spanish, Chinese, Russian, French, Arabic, Korean, German, Polish, Dutch, Danish, Hungarian, Burmese or Hebrew, according to the school district's website.  Princeton's population of about 31,200 is 67.2 percent white, non-Hispanic; 16.9 percent Asian; 7.5 percent Hispanic or Latino; and 5.7 percent Black. ''We have one of the oldest African-American communities in America; there were free Africans living here in the 17th century,'' said Sheldon Sturges, a founder of the nonprofit Princeton Future, a community planning organization.  Much of the Black community has been displaced over the past century, and Princeton, with its deep historical roots, is coming to terms with its racially troubled past. Having formerly rejected student activists' demands to remove Woodrow Wilson's name from its school of public and international affairs, the university reversed course last June and expunged it.  This June, a new name for the John Witherspoon Middle School will be selected from a list of alternatives offered by a committee and voted on by the public. Witherspoon, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, was among several slaveholders who led Princeton University in the 18th century. (Proposed substitutes include John Lewis, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Michelle Obama.) Witherspoon is also the name of one of the most prominent village streets. Paul Robeson, the singer, actor and activist, whose father was born in slavery, grew up there, in a historically Black neighborhood that has been gentrified. In April, Robeson's legacy was observed in a weeklong program of events that will be repeated in coming years, and his family house is being restored. He is also in the running for the new eponym for the middle school.  What You'll Find  Until recently, Princeton was two nested entities -- a village-like borough and a surrounding township -- that shared a name and a school system, but had different governing structures. They were combined in 2013.  Stretched over 600 largely neo-Gothic acres, Princeton University is the municipality's primary employer and a bounteous provider of free lectures, walking paths and sports events. (The football stadium remained open during the pandemic so the public could climb the stairs for exercise.)  On the campus, you will find such treasures as Nassau Hall (1756), which served as the nation's capitol in 1783; the Princeton University Art Museum, for which a new building has been designed by the Ghanaian-British architect David Adjaye; the McCarter Theatre Center, which since 1930 has brought groundbreaking actors, dancers and musicians to its stages; and even a New Jersey Transit train depot.  In April, the university announced plans to add three million square feet of construction over the next 10 years, including student housing, parking facilities and a 2,100-seat soccer stadium and racket center. It also vowed to reach net-zero emissions by its 300th anniversary, in 2046.  What Princeton University doesn't offer to the community in which it is a major landholder is much tax revenue. This is one reason residents have exorbitant property taxes, paying an average $20,352 on homes with an average value of $841,064.  Also contributing to the town's high tone are the Institute for Advanced Study, a research center whose past and current faculty include 35 Nobel laureates (not least Albert Einstein), and the Princeton Theological Seminary, a Presbyterian training ground founded in 1812.  History is embedded in almost every rock and brick -- clothed grandly in the Morven Museum & Garden, an 18th-century former New Jersey governor's mansion; unrolling in Princeton Battlefield State Park, where George Washington triumphed over British Regulars; popping up like crocuses at the Princeton Cemetery, where Aaron Burr, Grover Cleveland and Sylvia Beach (founder of the Paris bookshop Shakespeare & Company and James Joyce's publisher) are buried.  What You'll Pay  Residential housing data published on the website of Beatrice Bloom, a real estate agent in Princeton, indicates an average sale price in March of $1,067,894, based on 25 closed transactions, after an average 65 days on the market. In March 2020, the month the lockdown began, 15 houses closed for an average price of $820,393, after an average of 146 days on the market.  Princeton's most coveted houses, many dating from the 19th and early 20th centuries, tend to be in the old borough, within walking distance of the business district centered at the intersection of Nassau and Witherspoon Streets, across from the Princeton campus.  The least expensive property currently for sale is in Palmer Square, in the heart of the little downtown. This section was revitalized beginning in the 1930s (at the expense of a Black neighborhood there) and developed with apartments over shops. A furnished 272-square-foot condo in a 1932 shingled building is listed for $299,900, with a monthly homeowner fee of $258 and annual taxes of $5,372. The Residences at Palmer Square is a complex dating from 2012, with luxury condo units or townhouses that can be bought or rented.  An example of a loftier property somewhat removed from the center is a converted 121-year-old dairy barn with six bedrooms and a half-timbered tower that was originally an outbuilding on the Drumthwacket Estate, the official home of the governors of New Jersey. The price of that property, on two acres, recently dropped to $3.75 million, with annual taxes of $43,151.  The Vibe  A springtime Sunday shows Princeton at its best, with blossoms dripping from trees and street-side cafes humming. ''People go in on the weekend just to walk around,'' said Stephen Rounds, a local dentist, noting that shoppable village centers are especially attractive in car-centric New Jersey. Traffic snarls are one consequence; scarce and expensive street parking is another. (The local government has been working on solutions to both problems.)  As almost everywhere else, businesses have suffered during the pandemic. The empty shell of Brooks Brothers on Palmer Square reflects the store's national failure; more personal was the announcement in October that Henry and Robert Landau, brothers who owned a woolens shop that had been operating in Princeton since 1955 (with a little Einstein museum tucked in the back), were bowing to economic pressures and retiring. But residents like Dr. Rounds, who look back to a time when the downtown was quieter and quirkier, see possibilities for the return of mom-and-pops.  The Schools  Princeton Public Schools enrolls about 3,900 students in four kindergarten-through-fifth-grade elementary schools (Community Park, Johnson Park, Littlebrook and Riverside); one sixth-through-eighth-grade middle school; and one high school. State regulations permitting, the district plans to reopen for full-time, in-person learning in September.  On 2018-19 state tests, the last for which comparative results are available, 78.4 percent of elementary and middle-school students met standards in English, versus 57.9 percent statewide, with a participation rate of 95.4 percent; 63.6 percent met standards in math, versus 44.5 percent statewide, with a participation rate of 99.5 percent.  During the 2019-20 school year, 74 percent of 11th and 12th grade students enrolled in at least one Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate course, versus 35.7 percent statewide. The 32 subjects included microeconomics, music theory and Latin. Students may also arrange to take courses at Princeton University.  Average 2019-20 SAT scores were 646 in reading and writing and 655 in math, versus 536 in both subjects statewide.  Notable private schools include Princeton Day School, Stuart Country Day School and the Hun School of Princeton.  The Commute  The New Jersey Transit shuttle known as the ''Dinky'' makes its five-minute trip from Princeton to the adjacent community of Princeton Junction every day. Travel from there to Pennsylvania Station in New York takes an hour to 90 minutes and costs $16; a monthly pass is $451. The trip to 30th Street Station in Philadelphia takes an hour or two, with a transfer in Trenton, and costs $5; a monthly pass is $145.  The History  In 1683, a New Englander named Henry Greenland built a tavern, or ''house of accommodation,'' on the King's Highway, which had evolved from one of the pathways of the region's Lenni Lenape people. This was believed to be the first house in the municipality now known as Princeton, and parts of it remain in a building on the Princeton Kingston Road. In 1756 the College of New Jersey relocated to the area and constructed Nassau Hall as its quarters. The school changed its name to Princeton in 1896.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  Nassau Hall is the oldest building at Princeton University. The quintessential college town is full of ivy-clad buildings, tree-lined streets and a vibrant downtown. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003j "
240		"   BEYOND THE ALGORITHM House & Home/ Enjoy Movie Options Beyond the Algorithm  By Jason Bailey  1,235 words 25 April 2021   4     Enjoy these options that are off the beaten path.  This month's under-the-radar streaming picks include clever riffs on the police procedural and the crime thriller; a handful of relationship stories, in keys both comic and tragic; and a pair of memorable (and upsetting) documentaries.  'The Wailing' (2016)  Stream it on Amazon.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  What begins as a ''Memories of Murder''-style police procedural veers into darker, wilder territory in this unnerving and occasionally stomach-churning horror thriller from the writer and director Na Hong-jin. Jong-goo (Kwak Do-won) is a policeman whose investigation of a string of grisly killings is influenced by the gossip around him: ''All this happened,'' he is told, ''after that Japanese man arrived.'' When his family is drawn into the investigation, Jong-goo discovers exactly what he's capable of -- and then, things get really horrifying. The expansive 156-minute running time allows leisurely detours into character drama and bleak humor, but the picture never goes slack; there is something sinister in the air of this village, and Na builds that sense of inescapable dread with patience and power.  'Night Moves' (2014)  Stream it on Amazon.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Many of Kelly Reichardt's acolytes consider this eco-thriller to be among the director's lesser efforts, and when placed against ''Wendy and Lucy'' or ''First Cow,'' perhaps that's true. But Reichardt on her worst day surpasses most of her contemporaries on their best, and there's much to recommend in this morally thorny story of a trio of radical environmentalists (Jesse Eisenberg, Dakota Fanning and Peter Sarsgaard) as they meticulously plot and execute a dangerous act of protest. Reichardt hits the thriller beats, but casually and modestly; her emphasis, as ever, is on character, and she finds as much suspense in interactions as in the action itself.  'Skate Kitchen' (2018)  Stream it on Hulu.  The filmmaker Crystal Moselle's roots are in documentary -- she directed the 2015 Sundance sensation ''The Wolfpack'' -- and that ear for the rhythms and routines of real life are apparent in this hybrid feature, in which a group of female New York City skateboarders play fictionalized versions of themselves. Rachelle Vinberg stars as the outsider looking in, a would-be skater who idolizes this all-girl crew from social media, and works her way into their midst. The details are contemporary (and keenly observed), but ''Skate Kitchen'' is a good old-fashioned coming-of-age story, in which norms are challenged, lessons are learned and young people must decide which version of their possible selves they want to be.  'Pink Wall' (2019)  Stream it on Hulu.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  The writer and director Tom Cullen lays out the methodology for his relationship drama clearly and early with a loose two-shot of the couple at its center, in the fourth year of their union, out with family and making little jokes about very real issues between them. This predictably escalates into a knock-down-drag-out fight when the two are alone together. Cullen's wise and observant script is, in many ways, about that divergence: the difference between a couple's actions in public and in private. And the narrative structure -- skipping throughout the six years of their relationship, with signaling shifts in film stock and aspect ratio -- allows Cullen to maximize that contrast. He'll go from their first night together to their last, but not as a gimmick; he seems fascinated by the fact that two people who share such hope can eventually cause each other such pain. It's a tough, perceptive movie, and also a funny, sexy one.  'Man Up' (2015)  Stream it on HBO Max.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Countless contemporary romantic comedies have built their plots on deceptions, secret motives, false identities and so on, carried out long past the point of anything resembling plausibility. This London-set boy-meets-girl tale from the director Ben Palmer and the writer Tess Morris sets up that sort of duplicity. When Nancy (Lake Bell) is mistaken by Jack (Simon Pegg) for his blind date, she chooses to go along with his error. What's ingenious is how the film unexpectedly implodes the chicanery early on, and then watches the fireworks. The result is both a winking critique of the genre and a fine example of it. Bell and Pegg puncture conventions while still generating genuine chemistry and comic byplay.  'The Boy Downstairs' (2018)  Stream it on Hulu.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Zosia Mamet was the scene-stealer supreme of the HBO comedy ''Girls,'' her side plots often more compelling than the main narrative, so it's no surprise that this starring vehicle is such a charmer. She is Diana, an intelligent but insecure young woman trying to piece her life together; the title character is her ex-boyfriend (Matthew Shear), who returns to her proximity when she unwittingly moves into his apartment building. Mamet plays Diana's dilemma with the right mix of pathos and discomfort, while the writer and director Sophie Brooks crafts emotional stakes high enough to prevent the story from veering into sitcom territory.  'White Boy' (2017)  Stream it on Netflix.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  In 2018, Matthew McConaughey starred in ''White Boy Rick,'' a dramatization of the early life of the teenage drug dealer Richard Wershe Jr. But this documentary account was made first, and is the superior telling. The director Shawn Rech uses archival footage, contemporary interviews and re-enactments to tell the story of Wershe's rise and fall, drawing heavily on the impressions of the rich cast of colorful (and, mostly, scary) characters around him. But it's not just his story -- it's steeped in the history of Wershe's home turf of Detroit, and how it fell on hard times in the late 1980s thanks not only to the drug trade but also to corruption in the police department and at City Hall. The filmmaking is mostly by the numbers, but this is such a compelling story, it hardly matters.  'The Last Cruise' (2021)  Stream it on HBO Max.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  On Jan. 20, 2020, the Diamond Princess cruise ship departed the Port of Yokohama, with 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew members on board. By the time it returned after two weeks of stops throughout Southeast Asia, it had become a petri dish for Covid-19, with passengers quarantined in their staterooms as the number of positive cases ticked worrisomely upward every day. Hannah Olson's mini-documentary augments the memories of a handful of passengers and crew with their own video recordings of the ordeal, from their early, carefree (and, in retrospect, infectious) group activities to the days of worry and fear. It becomes a story of the haves and have-nots; since someone has to feed the guests, the crew has to keep working, and watching them do so (in close quarters, with no support) is as upsetting as any horror movie. ''The Last Cruise'' is a tough watch, but a necessary reminder of how, from the very beginning, the pandemic brought ongoing issues of class inequality to the fore.  Zosia Mamet stars as Diana in ''The Boy Downstairs,'' a film written and directed by Sophie Brooks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JON PACK/FILMRISE)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003h "
241		"   BRIDAL FASHION WEEK  One Year Later, Many Adjustments in Dress Industry  By Alix Strauss  1,426 words 25 April 2021   13     Designers are finding ways to stay alive after the economic tailspin caused by the pandemic. But optimism and determination have returned.  Before Covid hit, Christine Callahan and Samantha Brody, the founders of Ella & Oak, a company that focuses on bridal fashion for plus-size women, opened their first pop-up showroom on West 29th Street in Manhattan. Word of mouth spread quickly. The boutique shop, which showcased designers offering sizes 12-32, was busy. One-on-one hourly appointments were filled weeks in advance. Partnerships with other stores were being offered. Designers started approaching them rather than the other way around. The business had netted more than $20,000 in revenue in their first month.  ''We were doing better than expected,'' said Ms. Callahan, 36, who was speaking from her home in Charleston, S.C. ''We thought we had finally helped solve a problem in the industry: that plus-size women who have little options and have long been ignored, especially in bridal, finally had a place to go where samples fit, made by designers who understood them.''  Then came the pandemic.  ''We shut down the showroom and watched the world crumble,'' Ms. Callahan said. ''Brides were still contacting us for appointments and we couldn't take them. That was heart breaking. Then weddings stopped.''  By mid-May, Ella & Oak was in trouble. Fund-raising was canceled. Their business model, based on customers doing in-store shopping became nonexistent, which was followed by the realization that Covid wasn't going away.  ''As a start up, we needed to show proof points and that our business model worked,'' said Ms. Callahan, who, along with Ms. Brody, 34, had used their savings and money from friends and family to start the business. ''Covid canceled our fund-raising plans and our ideas of what the business looked like.''  Summer brought more bad news. Four in-store pop-up events planned on the East Coast during the spring, were canceled. Custom orders became impossible to fill. Cash ran out.  ''We met with our advisers at the end of June and decided the only way to keep our mission alive -- helping plus-size women feel beautiful and confident on their special day -- was to focus on our private label and wholesale,'' Ms. Callahan said. ''We didn't have the capital for marketing, but we were lucky because we didn't have employees or W2s or even a lease. Keeping the label gave us the option to move forward. But we would have to let go of the store.''  That also meant letting go of a business partner.  ''I was working directly with brides and reimagining the plus-size bridal experience,'' Ms. Brody said. ''When they decided to do only retail, there was no need for my focus or expertise, which is e-commerce and consumer.''  Ms. Brody left the business in June, and in September, she found full-time employment as a brand developer for a spirits start-up. ''We put our heart and soul into the business,'' she said. ''It was hard to see that go. But I understood the need to do it.''  [ Sign up for Love Letter and always get the latest in Modern Love, weddings, and relationships in the news by email. ]  Ms. Callahan, refusing to give up on the brand, stayed put in South Carolina and searched for manufacturers. She also set up meetings with retailers, stores and boutiques.  ''It's been hard, not a lot of wholesalers work with plus-sizes, and not a lot of stores want to invest right now, especially in plus-size bridal,'' she said. ''Plus-size women have been forgotten about, again. They are the first thing to be cut. The Loft is getting rid of their plus-size division to save money, that's not fair. It became even more important to move forward with this label.''  Ms. Callahan needed to get a full-time job and in November she became director of operations for the Geyser Group, a real estate investment company. ''It's the first time I went back to work in two years,'' she said. ''It's hard not to get a paycheck. At some point you have to eat.''  Ms. Callahan and Ms. Brody are not alone in this sea of wedding-focused businesses that are closing. Designers especially have been forced to thrive on a diet of determination, desire and drive.  Before the coronavirus, Rebecca Schoneveld, 38, who owns Rebecca Schoneveld Designs, had a store in Brooklyn with 16 employees. She operated two 4,000-square-foot studios. Within months she was forced to close her shop, retain only two staffers, find a smaller studio in Irvington, N.Y., which was only 800 square feet, stop production and work from home.  ''I started my brand in Brooklyn on Etsy in 2010,'' said Ms. Schoneveld, who lives in Pleasantville, N.Y. ''I was not going to close. I was going to survive this, even if it was me doing everything.  ''Making dresses was my joy,'' she added. ''I spent the year reflecting and turning my focus to making beautiful, one-of-a-kind dresses out of scrap material, appealing to a higher-end customer, and one-on-one connections with my clients.''  Ms. Schoneveld's husband tended to their two children during the day, including kindergarten zoom, giving her room to work. The result was a new collection, a partnership with Kleinfeld Bridal and a new store expected to open in June in Irvington.  ''I feel like I survived a fire,'' she said. ''I grabbed the parts I loved the most and I rebuilt with those. I feel clarity I haven't had in a long time and more connected to my business. I regained my love for design. I feel personally connected to this new collection.''  Amanda Ergen-Jennings, who owns Love Lives Here Bridal, had a similar experience.  ''Before the pandemic I was four days away from a huge bridal market in Chicago,'' said Ms. Ergen-Jennings, 40, who lives in Milwaukee. ''Stores were finally paying attention to me. I had 10 new ones lined up to take my collection. I was looking at hiring more people for my team. It was supposed to be a huge year of growth. Then the bottom fell out and it was me scrambling, juggling virtual schooling, taking care of everything and trying to keep my business from ending. The thought of doing that made me sick.''  For a while she was unable to find her visual voice.  ''I filled outstanding orders for brides whose wedding were still happening, but I didn't develop anything new,'' she said. ''The stress of keeping the business alive wiped out any creativity. I was just trying to survive. But in the past months I've been inspired. I'm sourcing new fabrics and getting ideas. These new pieces are really personal. That was lacking before.''  Ms. Callahan of Ella & Oak has had struggles and losses, too. ''You marry your co-founder,'' she said. ''It was heartbreaking to lose Sam. We risked our whole lives to do this. It's hard doing this alone. It's hard to know our business and the store are no longer front and center.''  She misses working with the brides. ''Some of our favorite memories were meeting and getting to know these women,'' Ms. Callahan said. ''I don't get to connect with them like before.''  She now sees hope on the horizon.  ''By moving forward with a private label there's been a renewed excitement,'' she said. ''Bridal is coming back. We now have 14 gowns, sash accessories, and bridal T-shirts. Other items are forthcoming and we are launching with CoEdition, a plus-size women's retail company. To be back in the game feels empowering and exciting.''  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook ( Styles and Modern Love ), Twitter ( Styles , Fashion and Weddings ) and Instagram .  Top right, Samantha Brody, left, and Christine Callahan, the founders of Ella & Oak, above, who were exceeding expectations before the pandemic changed everything. Top left, Samantha ($750), a dress from Ella & Oak's 2021 collection; above left, Amanda-Kerry ($2,750), a dress from Rebecca Schoneveld Bridal's 2021 collection; above right, Thalia ($2,800), a dress from the designer Amanda in Love Lives Here Bridal's 2021 collection. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRITTAINY NEWMAN/THE new_york_times; KATE BENSON PHOTOGRAPHY; MASHA MALTSAVA; BRITTAINY NEWMAN/THE new_york_times; LOTTIE LILLIAN PHOTOGRAPHY)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003f "
242		"   House & Home/ Book Your Summer Rental Now  By Sarah Firshein  1,705 words 25 April 2021   6     Travel is rebounding in the United States with gusto, as vaccination rates rise, restrictions loosen around the country and would-be travelers act on their eagerness to reunite with family and friends. The surge has already left its mark on the vacation-rentals market, where property owners, agencies and management companies are predicting an extremely busy, if not outright bonkers, summer.  ''This is probably contradictory to what a lot of people may think, but it's really one of the most exciting times in the industry right now,'' said Carrington Carter, the co-founder and managing partner of Getaway Society, a luxury vacation-rentals company with properties in Martha's Vineyard, Mass., Hilton Head, S.C., and other markets.  Looking to rent a vacation house this summer? Here's what we know.  You might already be too late  By the end of March, 90 percent of vacation homes on the Jersey Shore and Cape Cod listed on Vrbo were booked for July. Compare that to 2019, when more than 30 percent of homes in those markets were still available in March for the following July.  ''It's crazy -- there's so much pent-up demand,'' said Noelle Randall, the founder of Nuurez, a crowd-funded, short-term-rentals company that lists its properties on sites like Vrbo. ''We have bookings through August on almost every property -- like, totally booked up: all of June booked up, all of July booked up.''  Thanks to a confluence of the pandemic, wildfires and storms, Yosemite National Park has been half-opened and half-closed for the better part of a year. Yet reservations at The Redwoods In Yosemite, a company that operates more than 120 vacation homes in the park, are running well above normal. As of April 11, bookings for May were up 35 percent over the same date in 2019; June is up 37 percent and July is up 27 percent.  Similar patterns are materializing on Homes & Villas by Marriott International, a home rental platform, where the booking lead time for summer stays is 147 days this year -- up from 34 days last year.  ''We're beginning to see increased long-term confidence in booking summer travel in 2021,'' said Jenny Hsieh, the company's vice president. ''We're also seeing lower cancellation rates as demand grows -- consumers are less willing to give up what they booked since homes are getting filled up quickly.''  At Barkwells, a cluster of dog-friendly vacation rentals in North Carolina's Blue Ridge Mountains, bookings for the rest of the year are up almost 30 percent over what the forecast looked like in April 2019.  ''It's a combination of people being cooped up from home and being desperate to get out,'' said Michael Winner, who co-owns Barkwells with his wife, Ellen. ''I think vaccinations are making us more comfortable.''  You're competing with everyone, for anything  Another factor driving demand: the Covid-fueled surge in second-home buyers who actually want to use -- if not live in -- their weekend houses.  ''With the flexibility of remote work, owners are finding that they have more time to enjoy their second homes and are renting them less, or not at all,'' Mr. Carter said. ''This reduction in the supply of available homes to rent, coupled with increasing demand, are also factors that are driving rate increases in destinations across the country.''  Rental companies are also seeing the usual search metrics take a back seat to the bald need to find a place.  ''Your large houses always book up way in advance, because those are usually two and three families, so they have to plan,'' said Ms. Randall, of Nuurez. ''But what's surprising is that every type of property, even the studios and one-bedrooms, are booked.''  One potential downside to being booked solid for the summer, she said: ''Last-minute bookings are definitely one of the ways that you increase your bottom line. This year, we may not have that opportunity at all.''  Unlike last year, when many property owners experienced mass cancellations in tandem with ever-changing state and local restrictions, this summer is likely to bring a blanket wave of guests. Many rental companies are still offering flexible cancellations on paper, but few are worried about needing to put them to use in practice -- or filling a spot, should a renter indeed cancel at the last minute. That presents an operational challenge: making the gears run smoothly with few, if any, gaps between stays.  ''There are a lot of operators and owners who aren't accustomed to being fully booked, and it can be tough to make sure they're sorting out cleaning schedules and things like that,'' said Jeremy Gall, a vacation-rentals industry veteran and the chief executive and founder of Breezeway, a property care and cleaning operations platform.  But, he added, ''I think it's all generally good news, especially in the context of the last 12 months. I don't think there's an owner, host or manager who would trade off the uncertainty that they felt this time last year for a fully booked summer.''  You'll probably pay more than you did in 2019  According to Transparent, a vacation-rentals data company, the countywide average nightly rate for Airbnb vacation rentals in July and August is expected to be around $220. Last year, it was $194; in 2019, it was $185.  At Evolve, a hospitality company that manages more than 14,000 short-term rentals around the United States, nightly rates are up 27 percent in July and 19 percent in August, over those same months in 2019.  ''I'd be remiss to say that we didn't raise our rates significantly,'' said Jon Mayo, whose Airbnb in Palm Springs has more nights booked this summer than ever before, despite the sure-to-be-sweltering desert temperatures. ''I'm renting at rates I wouldn't have even dreamed of three years ago.''  Across the 1,000 vacation homes managed by Twiddy & Company, a hospitality and asset management firm in North Carolina's Outer Banks, weekly summer rates have risen 8 percent since 2019, from $8,406 to $9,152. On StayMarquis, a luxury vacation-property management company, average rates in the Hamptons this summer -- around $1,360 a night -- are up 12 percent over 2019. Nightly rates across the 270 rentals managed by Hawai'i Life, a luxury brokerage and rental management company in Hawaii, are up 11 percent from 2019.  You'll probably stay for a while  The elongated travel patterns that emerged last summer, from monthlong stays to four- and five-night ''weekends,'' are back in full force this year.  ''We have more multiple-week guests this year than ever,'' said Mr. Winner, of Barkwells. ''Guests may be vacationing for some of the time, but they can also check in with the office.''  Across Evolve's portfolio, the average length of stay this summer has increased from 3.7 days last year to 4.9 days. HomeToGo, a large vacation-rentals search engine, is reporting that the average domestic traveler with a check-in date between May 1 and Sept. 1 will stay for 11 days, a 14 percent increase from 2019.  ''We're seeing an emerging trend of 'slow travel,' with travelers wanting to spend more time immersing themselves in a destination than they did prepandemic,'' said Mahendra Roopa, HomeToGo's director of product.  For homeowners like Mr. Mayo, longer stays mean fewer annual ''turns'': sunk costs like housekeeping and laundry between stays. The benefits to the traveler are also clear.  ''People delayed so many trips last year, and part of taking longer trips this summer is just: 'I really want to get away,''' Mr. Gall said. ''It might really be that simple.''  If you're looking for a nonurban destination, you're not alone  Jim Prugh owns nine properties in Lindsborg, Kan., a city of less than 4,000 known as ''Little Sweden USA'' for its Scandinavian heritage and culture.  ''When thinking of vacation rental destinations, central Kansas might not be on everyone's list,'' he said. ''But I'm already seeing that pricing and lead times will be increasing very soon in tandem with the demand for overnight stays.''  Mr. Prugh's numbers have been up all year, and he expects his third-quarter occupancy rate to top 61 percent, up from around 53 percent last year.  That tracks with new findings from AirDNA, a data firm that analyzes 10 million vacation rentals worldwide: Cities -- with the exception of small, rural ones -- are generally down in summer bookings, compared to 2019.  Meanwhile, July, August and September bookings for coastal destinations across the country are up around 18 percent over 2019, according to AirDNA, and destinations with mountains and lakes are up 14 percent. The AirDNA data shows regions like the Poconos and Adirondacks pacing well above 2019.  But even markets where summer isn't usually high season are seeing a boom this year, including Broken Bow Lake, Okla., and the North Georgia Mountains, whose summer rental bookings are up around 68 percent and 46 percent, respectively, over this point in 2019, according to AirDNA.  And new Airbnb survey data shows that travelers feel comfortable with the idea of venturing beyond their comfort zone this summer; rural properties between 1,000 and 3,000 miles from home comprise the second largest share of searches for Memorial Day Weekend trips, after searches for rural rentals within a 300-mile radius.  ''With occupancy so high, at a certain point you just won't be able to find a place,'' Mr. Gall said. ''So people who might have gone to Martha's Vineyard or Nantucket are not going to do it -- they're going to find a quiet lake somewhere else.''  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places list for 2021 .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Michelle Mruk FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003e "
243		"   SHELTERING  A Plan to Lock Out All Package Thieves  By Tim McKeough  989 words 25 April 2021   2     Are you tired of deliveries being stolen before you have the chance to retrieve them? Outdoor package bins offer a solution.  Shortly after moving into their renovated brownstone in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, at the end of 2019, Jordan Slocum and Barry Bordelon began experiencing a problem that now consumes many urban dwellers: package theft.  ''It was three or four packages, over the course of a few months,'' said Mr. Bordelon, 40.  The issue was compounded when Mr. Slocum and Mr. Bordelon, who work together as renovation bloggers and project managers under the name Brownstone Boys, began accepting deliveries for some of their clients' renovations.  ''It was becoming quite stressful,'' said Mr. Slocum, 38. ''We'd be at meetings and get a UPS notification, and have to leave immediately as we knew there was a thousand dollars' worth of product sitting on our stoop.''  They weren't alone. In 2019, an analysis conducted for The new_york_times found that 1.7 million packages are stolen or go missing across the country every day, with 90,000 packages disappearing in New York City alone. In 2020, 43 percent of respondents to a national survey conducted by C & R Research reported being victims of package theft, up from 36 percent in 2019.  For Mr. Slocum and Mr. Bordelon, it didn't take long to grow tired of planning their lives around deliveries. Searching for a solution, they discovered ParcelBin (from $695), a lockable parcel delivery box made by CitiBin, a Brooklyn-based company that got its start making enclosures for trash and recycling.  Since installing the unit in front of their brownstone in March of last year, they haven't had to worry about porch pirates. And, they routinely recommend the product to their clients, many of whom have purchased ParcelBins of their own.  Liz Picarazzi, the founder of CitiBin, said she developed the product after receiving a flood of inquiries from anxious homeowners. ''We had people, primarily in Brooklyn, who had seen the trash enclosures, calling us and asking, 'Hey, can we use that for package delivery?''' she said. ''Luckily, it was very easy. We just had to change a couple of components.''  The company introduced its ParcelBin in 2018, an enclosure built from powder-coated aluminum and composite siding with space for a combination padlock or an integrated electronic lock. In the second half of 2020, as more people did more shopping online during the pandemic, Ms. Picarazzi said, CitiBin's sales of parcel units jumped 70 percent, compared to 2019.  Other companies make similar products in different dimensions and materials, such as CleverMade's smaller steel Parcel Lockbox S100 (about $60) and ParcelWirx plastic tubs from RTS Home Accents (from about $122).  Successful implementation of any of these units requires asking delivery companies to use them, and sharing the combination. Typically, users share their combinations via online profiles with companies like Amazon.com, UPS and FedEx.  Marc Weber, a property manager at Weber-Farhat Realty Management who recommended numerous ParcelBins for a 55-unit co-op in Morningside Heights with an unattended lobby where packages were getting stolen, said there's a learning curve to getting the system up and running.  ''The biggest challenge going into it was the communication and making sure that people were able get the parcels in the bins,'' he said. ''As long as residents are very specific with the directions, like 'Hey, put it in this locker, with this combination,' then it's clear,'' he said, and delivery companies are usually happy to oblige.  For those who don't want to bother with codes, some companies make parcel drop boxes with an unlocked top section that deposits packages into a locked box below when closed, similar to the drop boxes used by the Postal Service and delivery companies. The trade-off is they typically have less storage space inside than a similarly sized bin with combination lock.  CitiBin introduced one such unit, named ParcelDrop ($445), this past December. Bob Box is another made-in-Brooklyn solution (from $275). Other companies, like Architectural Mailboxes, based in Redondo Beach, Calif., and dVault, based in Colorado Springs, Colo., have been making them for years.  ''It comes down to simplicity,'' said Alexander Clark, the marketing director at dVault, which makes a wide range of units, including a heavy-duty curbside Full Service Vault ($899) that can handle both mail and packages. ''Other competitors try to have a locking mechanism with a code; however, you need to get compliance from all these agencies that are used to their ways,'' he said. ''We have a simplified security drop door.''  Sales at dVault had been growing about 10 to 15 percent per year until 2020, Mr. Clark said, when they jumped about 100 percent after the pandemic took hold.  Whether homeowners choose a drop box, select an extra-large bin or just add a combination padlock to a crate they make themselves, having a secure place for packages when no one's home is surprisingly liberating, Mr. Bordelon said.  ''I know it sounds crazy, but it's actually been sort of life-changing,'' he said of his ParcelBin. ''It relieves so much stress.''  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  The Full Service Vault from dVault is a curbside unit with a parcel drop door and space for mail. The secure unit is priced at $899. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA DVAULT); Jordan Slocum, left, and Barry Bordelon were moved to install a ParcelBin from CitiBin after having their package deliveries stolen from the stoop of their brownstone in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.; An apartment building in Morningside Heights with an unattended lobby installed numerous ParcelBins -- one per floor -- to thwart any bids to steal packages being delivered there. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003d "
244		"    For Some Residents, Flying Their Flag Isn't Easy  By Debra Kamin  1,829 words 25 April 2021   8     If you live in a community with a homeowners association, chances are good that you may be limited to just the Stars and Stripes.  David Pendery's rainbow pride flag had only been waving outside his house for a few days when a letter arrived ordering him to take it down.  Mr. Pendery, 44, a marketing executive, lives with his husband and their two children in Arapahoe County, Colo. When he hung up the flag at the end of August 2020, he hoped that the pennant would show solidarity for L.G.B.T.Q. families like his. What he didn't anticipate was a drawn-out legal battle, one that took him all the way to Denver Federal District Court in early March.  There are more than 370,000 homeowners associations across the country, collectively representing more than half of all owner-occupied U.S. homes. Homeowners associations, which are created with the purpose of upholding property values, also dictate quotidian duties of homeownership: where to place trash bins, when to trim lawns, even which colors of paint are appropriate. But buried in their contracts are often limits on the size and style of flags that homeowners can fly. At a time when even the image of the American flag has become polarizing, these policies are leading to accusations of partisanship and violations of constitutional rights.  ''HOAs get most of their powers from the contracts that they make their residents sign,'' said Jeremy Rovinsky, a law professor and dean of National Paralegal College. ''These allow the HOA to regulate expression that would otherwise be considered 'free speech.'''  In Mr. Pendery's case, his community is overseen not by a traditional homeowners association, but a metropolitan district, which is a government entity with a democratically elected board. That district maintains a home improvement reference guide, which states that preapproval is required for nearly all flags. Only military pennants and the U.S. flag are exempt.  Flag restrictions for private homes can be as varied as U.S. housing stock. Some stipulate the size of permissible flags; others allow holiday signs and sports banners, but little else.  They also vary by state. California prevents homeowners associations from restricting flags except in matters of public health or safety; in Arizona and Texas, restrictions on political signs are lifted in the months immediately preceding an election and for a handful of days following.  In this past election cycle, flags were unfurled with a new urgency. ''I think I saw more flags used as political symbols than at any other time in my life,'' said Michael Green, a flag researcher and designer. He started his own company, Flags for Good, in the lead-up to the 2020 election.  The 2005 federal Freedom to Fly the American Flag Act makes it illegal for any homeowners association or property management company to restrict a resident from flying the American flag, although many associations do place limits on the size and height of the Stars and Stripes. But when it comes to other pennants, a homeowner's right to free speech is often irrelevant if they live in a community with a homeowners association.  The First Amendment prohibits the government from infringing on a citizen's right to free speech, but homeowners associations aren't government entities. Their ability to censor expression is much broader. ''For a constitutional violation to occur, you need a state actor,'' Mr. Rovinsky said. ''Yes, you do have freedom of speech, but while the government can't infringe on that, your HOA can say you can't put up a Black Lives Matter sign.''  Residents who have challenged HOAs have had more success arguing violations on the Fair Housing Act or the Civil Rights Act, which both prevent discrimination based on race, religion or gender. ''A court would want to look for discriminatory intent,'' Mr. Rovinsky said.  Mr. Pendery was told he would need to apply for approval in order to fly his flag, which he chose not to do. Instead, he filed an open-records request to see if there were irregularities in how and when his district enforced its flag guidelines. He read through 500 pages of emails from district committee members, then reached out to the American Civil Liberties Union of Colorado, who sued the district on his behalf.  ''I believe it was selective enforcement,'' Mr. Pendery said. ''My flag was clearly so egregious that within 48 hours of me putting it up, I had a letter about it. I didn't see that sort of expeditious action being taken against their other guidelines.''  The A.C.L.U. of Colorado won an injunction on March 4, and the district is now hammering out new language that removes the requirement that residents submit flags for approval before flying them. ''I put my flag back up the same day,'' Mr. Pendery said. The incident, he said, was a lesson for his children, ages 2 and 8.  ''We made this case because it's important to stand up for what you believe in, and what's right,'' he said. ''The biggest thing I want them to know is that there are people who have been marginalized or taken advantage of, and you need to stand up for the little guy. You need to stand up for your family.''  Mr. Pendery's case was just one of about 50 complaints about flag restrictions that the A.C.L.U. of Colorado has heard of this year. ''It's snowballed since last fall,'' said Mark Silverstein, A.C.L.U. of Colorado's legal director. The vast majority of complaints, he said, are centered around flags with social justice messages or political symbols associated with Democratic and left-wing causes.  ''Some HOAs may have tolerated or declined to enforce rules when the signs or flags were not viewed as controversial,'' Mr. Silverstein said. But when residents complain, he said, they are more likely to issue a citation. ''And in some quarters, these social justice signs are perceived as having a more controversial edge to them, and that has resulted in people nudging HOAs to enforce their rules.''  When it comes to homeowners' free speech, courts often disagree about the classification of homeowner associations. While some states view them as purely private organizations, other states, like California, see them as an extension of the government. ''Several court decisions in California have considered HOAs to be quasi-governmental entities,'' said Patricia Brum, a Los Angeles-based attorney with the law offices of Snell & Wilmer. ''So in that context, the HOAs in California are more restricted when it comes to the application of free speech.''  The fact that Mr. Pendery's community is overseen not by a traditional HOA but a metropolitan district with a democratically elected board likely gave him a significant edge in his legal case.  Kara and Ben Wilkoff, who live with their three children in an community run by a homeowners association in Littleton, Colo., also reached out to the A.C.L.U. of Colorado for help with a flag issue. Ms. Wilkoff, 40, and Mr. Wilkoff, 38, hung a Black Lives Matter flag outside of their home last August. Four months later, their homeowners association ordered them to take it down and submit a formal approval request.  Ms. Wilkoff, a TV producer, said that she chose to raise the Black Lives Matter flag after the deaths of Black Americans at the hands of police, including Breonna Taylor, Elijah McClain and George Floyd. It was a sign of solidarity, but also a way for Ms. Wilkoff, who has a Black father and a white mother, to connect with her own identity.  ''I'm white passing, and I have always struggled a little bit with race and identity,'' she said. ''I wanted to be supportive of the Black lives in my life, my children's lives and my father's life. So I got a flag.''  In February, the Wilkoffs collected a number of signatures of support for their flag and submitted a formal request for approval, which was denied. There was no reason given for the denial. In the next few weeks, their community will vote on a motion to change their bylaws to specifically allow flags.  Not all homeowners have the stomach for such a fight.  Paul Whelan, 74, an automotive technician in Waterside, Penn., was devastated by the election of President Joe Biden in November and decided that same month to take down the American flag in front of his home. In its place, Mr. Whelan, a veteran of the U.S. Marine Corps, raised the Gadsden flag, the yellow banner with a coiled rattlesnake and the words ''Don't Tread On Me.'' The flag, which has been used by both the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Navy, dates back to the American Revolution but was also among the far-right symbols seen during the January 6 insurrection at the U.S. Capitol.  He soon received an email from his homeowner's association telling him the flag was not in compliance with the homeowner association's flag rules, and he would have to take it down.  ''The Gadsden flag was one of our country's first flags. There's nothing wrong with it. Yes, the Tea Party and Trump supporters have carried it, but that doesn't make it bad,'' he said. ''This is cancel culture.''  Mr. Whelan said he chose not to challenge the homeowners association's ruling so as to spare his wife, who is currently undergoing treatment for aggressive breast cancer, any additional stress. ''I love a good fight, but she doesn't need any more aggravation in her life,'' he said.  For now, the flagpole in front of his home stands empty.  Mr. Silverstein, of the A.C.L.U., says that while it's difficult to anticipate whether or not the uptick in homeowner complaints might change federal laws against flag restrictions, he believes there is a possibility that in Colorado, Mr. Pendery's case could lead to a battle at the state level.  ''Flags have always been communication tools,'' said Mr. Green, the flag researcher. ''They are the way we identify certain groups and how we define our tribes. It's just fabric on a stick, but it's a powerful thing.''  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  Top, David Pendery fought to be able to fly a pride flag outside his home in suburban Denver. Above left, Ben and Kara Wilkoff of Littleton, Colo., don't want to take down their Black Lives Matter flag. Above right, Paul Whelan of Waterside, Pa., took down the Gadsden flag after being told it violated the rules. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BENJAMIN RASMUSSEN FOR THE new_york_times; HANNAH PRICE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003b "
245		"   ON LOCATION  From Raw Space to Modern Showstopper  By Tim McKeough  1,011 words 25 April 2021   9     For one Chicago entrepreneur, it was a design that felt as if it had been pulled straight from her unconscious. (And there are lots of chains.)  When Jolita Leonas-Arzbaecher was planning her new penthouse apartment in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago, she gave her design team some very specific instructions.  ''My home has to be as unique, dramatic and one of a kind as I am,'' she told them. ''Dramatic in the sense of being fascinating, unexpected and powerful.''  The grandiosity wasn't lost on her. ''How's that for me boasting?'' she joked recently.  All kidding aside, Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher, 65, an agricultural landowner and philanthropist interested in integrative and preventive medicine, views her home as an extension of herself, and she wanted the 4,320-square-foot apartment to be something truly uncommon.  ''My home is a part of me,'' she said. ''My art is a part of me.''  Although the apartment was being built as part of a development project converting and expanding a 1930s Art Deco parking garage into luxury condos, she signed a contract to buy the unit as raw space, for $3.3 million in 2017, she said, knowing that contractor-grade finishes would never satisfy her.  Then she commissioned Kevin Toukoumidis, an architect and the founding principal of the Chicago-based firm dSpace Studio, to turn it into the modernist home of her dreams.  ''When you get in early, there's opportunity,'' Mr. Toukoumidis said. ''We were brought in before the steel was erected and before the concrete floors were poured. So the opportunity was that we were able to redesign and reinvent this floor plan.''  For two years, he worked with the developer to customize the design of the unit before bringing in his own builder, Fraser Construction, to finish the job. And he spent hours talking with Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher, teasing out the design details that would make her happy.  ''For me, designing a home for our clients is all about this intimate process,'' Mr. Toukoumidis said. ''You have to understand the client's lifestyle today, but even more important, help them think about how they're going to live in the future.''  In this case, he heard, loud and clear, his client's desire for a showstopping interior full of artful touches, metallic accents and pristine, white surfaces. And he designed a four-bedroom home that, to Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher, almost seemed pulled from her unconscious.  ''Kevin has this incredible ability to wear the hat of a psychologist,'' she said. ''At times, I felt he knew me better than even I know myself.''  Mr. Toukoumidis installed a floor of oversized white-porcelain tiles and, at the center of the space, added a gas fireplace open on all sides and wrapped by steel rods, with blackened-oak panels above. ''It's viewable from the family room, the dining room, even the kitchen,'' he said.  He used the same materials to create a pantry with a hatch that allows it to serve as a bar for entertaining. For the kitchen, he worked with Poliform to build counters and cabinet doors in white Corian, then added a wall of cabinetry finished in metallic lacquer and a backsplash of satin mirror to deliver on Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher's request for a little shimmer.  The primary suite has a large dressing room with glass-and-metal-mesh doors, a bedroom with asymmetrical light boxes set into the headboard wall and a minimalist spalike bathroom finished in white porcelain, white Corian and clear glass.  For help with sourcing fashion-forward furniture, sumptuous materials and custom art pieces to further personalize the space, Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher hired Project Interiors on Mr. Toukoumidis's recommendation. Aimee Wertepny, the owner of Project, and Jennifer Kranitz, the lead designer on the project, were immediately taken with Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher's enthusiasm for daring design.  '''Show us what you got' was sort of her M.O.,'' Ms. Wertepny said. ''She really wanted to see how we could push the boundaries.''  ''The word 'sexy' was used a lot,'' Ms. Kranitz added.  They designed a 26-foot sofa that snakes across two walls of a sitting area, with an undulating seat to accommodate Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher and her guests, whether they feel like sitting or sprawling. Above the sofa, the walls are swagged with bronze-hued ball chains made by Beth Kamhi, an artist, that drape down to the cushions and spill onto the floor at one end.  In the primary bedroom, they asked Studio BK to give the walls a thick finish of smoky plaster. ''We wanted something textural and almost reptilian,'' Ms. Kranitz said. ''It feels very sultry. It's a super moody room.''  To filter light in the main living space, they installed mesh curtains over the floor-to-ceiling windows. For the walls and ceilings in more intimate spaces, they added wallcoverings that resemble metals, painterly lines and animal skins.  By the time Ms. Leonas-Arzbaecher moved into her new apartment in November 2019, she had spent about $1.6 million. The daily dividend on that investment? Getting to live in a space that is precisely tailored to her personality.  ''I walk in and I just say, 'I'm home,''' she said. ''I absolutely love it, because the home is such a reflection of me.''  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.  Top left, Jolita Leonas-Arzbaecher; top right, a seating area in the condo. Above, from left: the kitchen, with counters and cabinet doors in Corian; a curved sofa with an installation of bronze-hued ball chains. Near right, chairs upholstered with a metallic fabric in the dining area; far right, the main bedroom, with recessed light boxes above a custom headboard. Bottom, from left: a bedroom that is used as an office; a powder room with a custom black granite sink. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHELLE LITVIN FOR THE new_york_times; TONY SOLURI)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003c "
246		"    Measuring a Nation's Loss by the Years Covid Stole From Its Families  By Kat Eschner  1,730 words 25 April 2021   6     Some experts insist it's more important to track the time we've lost to the pandemic rather than the lives.  Anna Carter would be 14 if she were alive today. She would be finishing eighth grade and growing her savings account by babysitting for neighborhood kids. In a year, she would have started high school; in two, she would have been old enough to test for her driver's license. That's where her future starts to blur -- after all, two years is a long time for a teenager.  But Anna died suddenly last July in the emergency room of the Comanche County Memorial Hospital in Lawton, Okla. ''We checked in at like 6:15,'' said her mother, Amber Carter, 42, ''and by 8 o'clock, my husband and I were walking out without her.''  She was the first child to die of Covid-19 in Oklahoma. Most people lost to this pandemic in the United States have been much older, but, on average, each victim died about nine years early, according to a recently published study from the University of South Florida. Each death represented lost time.  Anna lost: three or four trips to Central Mall every month with her 18-year-old sister, Sophia; countless hours practicing tap and hip-hop and the opportunity to start jazz dance; and eventually, she hoped, a big family like the one she grew up in with her four siblings.  ''There's a whole life that's not going to be able to be finished,'' Ms. Carter said from her home in Fort Sill, Okla.  For the past year, experts and journalists have struggled to express what Covid-19 has taken. But health statisticians are increasingly using a calculation called years of life lost, which counts how much time the victims could have lived if they hadn't died. They say it can help us determine which communities have lost the most and prioritize how to recover.  ''In a pandemic situation, everybody's gone to the lowest common denominator, which is the number of deaths,'' said Andrew Briggs, a professor of health economics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.  Looking at lost years shifts the focus from death to life and reveals the depth of this pandemic's impact crater: In 2020, the United States lost around four million years of potential life, a sweeping international study published in February found.  ''It's such a big number that if I'm truly honest, we don't have the mental capacity to process it,'' said one study author, Mikko Myrskyla, the executive director of the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.  The life insurance industry would translate those years -- particularly before retirement -- into dollars. Public health experts refer to them as a burden of disease. But they are also a loss of opportunity -- to raise a family, build a house or a business or be part of a community.  ''Life has stages,'' said Mary Bassett, director of the FXB Center for Health and Human Rights at Harvard University, ''and we all hope to experience all of them.''  Even deaths among the old were premature.  Many public health researchers have pushed agencies to use lost years as well as deaths to create a fuller picture of the toll on communities and allow policymakers and the public to see the effectiveness of safety measures like social distancing and mask-wearing.  Dr. Briggs said that by centering the Covid-19 conversation around deaths, it makes it easier to discount some who have died. ''We moved from a situation where everyone was concerned about flattening the curve,'' he said, ''to people starting to talk about, well, these are old people who would have died anyway.''  That's the problem with the death statistic: It's easy to spin, because it doesn't contain very much information.  Dr. Briggs's study compared years of life lost during the pandemic's first wave in the United States, Britain and several other countries. It showed that even older people with comorbidities lost a tremendous number of years -- more than a year per person even among those between 90 and 100. The February study found that the largest contributors to lost years were in the 55 to 75 group, which Dr. Briggs's study found to have lost between 5.5 and 25 years each, depending on their age and health.  ''It's not true that people would have died anyway,'' he said. Other research has built on this concept, concluding that prioritizing the oldest and frailest people for vaccines saved not only the most lives, but also the most years of potential life.  One reason for findings like these is that life expectancy usually increases the longer one lives, Dr. Briggs said. For instance, people who were 65 in 2020 can now be expected to live into their 80s, rather than dying at 74.2 years of age, which was their life expectancy at birth in 1955.  Some communities are getting hit harder.  Who dies of Covid-19 is ''unbelievably strongly correlated with age,'' said Dr. Christopher Murray, director of the University of Washington's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. For most diseases, the likelihood of death after infection goes up by about 3 percent per year of life lived, he said, whereas Covid-19 raises it by 9 percent to 10 percent per year.  But you can't get Covid-19 if you aren't exposed to the pathogen. And in the United States, the likelihood of exposure is directly related to race. Recent data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows that deaths of Black and Latino people are occurring at a rate 1.9 and 2.3 times higher than that of white people.  But those figures hide the true toll, according to a research team led by Dr. Bassett. They found that between March and June of 2020, Black Americans under the age of 65 lost 4.6 times as many years of life as white Americans. For Hispanic Americans the number was 3.2 times as high. Preliminary analysis of the same data through March 2021 shows the trend continuing.  The losses among younger people in these groups, ages 25 to 54, were even more lopsided -- as much as nine times higher than those of white Americans.  ''Not only were people of color dying at higher rates,'' she said, ''they were dying at younger ages.''  These deaths can't be accounted for by a higher rate of comorbidities alone. Exposure played a key role, she said, ''driven by who was still working, who was on public transit, who was going home to crowded apartments.''  The loss of high numbers of young people is also a hallmark of Covid-19's impacts in low- and middle-income countries, according to the February study. In the United States, it found people 55 to 75 bore the greatest proportion of lost years, but those younger than that bore about one-fifth -- less than the global average but far more than in Britain, Canada or Israel. The effects of these kinds of losses will carry on for generations.  ''It matters how old you are when you die,'' said Dr. Bassett. People value the presence of elders in their lives, she said, ''But when someone dies too young,'' she said, ''a family may lose a breadwinner. They may leave children without a parent.''  'We don't live our lives statistically.'  ''We get more call to think about years of life lost in low-income and middle-income settings,'' Dr. Murray said. In the early 1990s the World Bank used it as the basis of its Global Burdens of Disease study, which is now produced annually.  In the United States, it continues to be used in the insurance industry, where it originated, to calculate premiums and for other purposes. It isn't often used to talk about public health, although there's a movement to use it in drug pricing.  There's good reason to use it, Dr. Murray and others said. ''We've had clear difficulties figuring out what works best, when, and in what contexts,'' said Adeline Lo, a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin who was an author on the international study. ''This at least puts another fact on the table that may be helpful.''  Choosing to prioritize demographics that are losing the greatest number of overall years would be one way to lessen the pandemic's toll. Even so, no number can truly capture human loss.  ''We don't live our lives statistically,'' said Dan Bouk, a historian of demography from Colgate University. When they think of this pandemic, most people will remember those they took care of, the illnesses they suffered or the loved ones they lost, he said. ''Neither aggregate death totals nor years of life lost will accurately capture that experience.''  Before her death last summer, Anna Carter lived 13 years, eight months and eight days. In that time, she hiked Mount Fuji, went to church, played with her baby brother, David, and coveted fake nails. She aspired to become an entertainer or maybe go into medicine and try to make the world better for others with scleroderma, the autoimmune disease she lived with.  Her life expectancy at birth was 77.9 years. You could measure the loss of her time in years she might have spent with her family or the degrees she might have earned. Perhaps it's the dances she won't perform or the cures she won't find. Or just the years her family expected to have with her as a daughter and sister. ''I just have her smiling face in my head all the time,'' Amber Carter said.  The Carters, a military family, were planning to move to the East Coast in a few years, when Anna's father retired. After her death, their plans changed. They will stay in Fort Sill, near her grave in the National Cemetery. Her parents plan to be buried alongside her when the time comes. ''God changed our lives with hers,'' her marker reads.  Kat Eschner is a freelance science and business journalist based in Toronto.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hokyoung Kim FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0003a "
247		"   T BOOK CLUB  Her Many Faces  By Rennie McDougall  3,194 words 25 April 2021   3     This article is part of T's Book Club , a series of essays and events dedicated to classic works of American literature. Click here to R.S.V.P. to a virtual conversation about ''The Talented Mr. Ripley,'' to be led by Edmund White and held on April 22.  Who was Patricia Highsmith? Most answers warrant a rebuttal. The writer was a collision of contradictions, a woman for whom every aspect of herself (including being a woman) demanded internal debate. In her private life, she swung dramatically between polar states of desire and disgust. Her personal journals that she kept her whole life -- separate from what she called her ''cahiers,'' or notebooks in which she worked on her fiction -- reveal a woman at the mercy of her emotional tides, drawn to the darkest corners of her psyche.  This fraught multiplicity fueled her fiction. Her characters longed to escape the drudgery of selfhood and convention. She seems to have adopted the French writer André Gide's notion of character, whereby contradiction is our most human quality -- consistency, he wrote in his 1925 novel ''The Counterfeiters,'' ''is on the contrary the very thing which makes us recognize that [characters] are artificially composed.'' Highsmith's most enduring creation, the duplicitous Tom Ripley, took this notion to such extremes of moral indifference that he frightened many readers, but his unpredictability rang true for Highsmith, for whom Ripley was a pen-and-ink alter ego. ''Every book is an argument with myself,'' she wrote, even if she had no desire for resolution. Rather, her work revealed the writer as she was, a multitude of warring selves -- the public and the private, the moral and the degenerate, the loving and the conniving. Tellingly, there are three biographies about Highsmith: Andrew Wilson's ''Beautiful Shadow: A Life of Patricia Highsmith'' (2003); Joan Schenkar's ''The Talented Miss Highsmith: The Secret Life and Serious Art of Patricia Highsmith'' (2009); and Richard Bradford's ''Devils, Lusts, and Strange Desires: The Life of Patricia Highsmith,'' published earlier this year. Below, an examination of several facets of the complicated writer.  Married to Mother  Highsmith's mother, Mary Coates, was born in Alabama in 1895 and gave birth to her only child when she was 25 years old. Nothing made Highsmith feel closer to her mother than lighting her cigarette for her. ''I'm happy if I can be boss,'' the author once wrote of their relationship, which more closely resembled a marriage than anything else. Highsmith stated it even more plainly in a two-line poem from 1940: ''I am married to my mother / I shall never wed another.''  Mary, who was a struggling commercial artist (she worked for a period as a fashion illustrator for Women's Wear Daily, likely instilling in Highsmith her passion for glamorously dressed women), left the biggest impression on her daughter in 1933. That year, Mary -- who was in an unstable relationship with Highsmith's stepfather, Stanley Highsmith, and moved the family between Fort Worth, Texas, and New York City several times -- decided to reunite with Stanley in New York. She left Highsmith, then 12, behind in Texas, where Highsmith remained in the care of her grandmother for an entire year. Highsmith thought this an unforgivable betrayal and clung to the incident for the rest of her life, reliving it through her own romantic partnerships. ''I repeat the pattern, of course, of my mother's semi-rejection of me,'' she wrote. ''I never got over it. Thus I seek out women who will hurt me in a similar manner.''  Highsmith's relationship with her mother became a decades-long battle for affection and retribution. The two fought so aggressively they once required sedation afterward. Highsmith accused her mother of ''trite conversation,'' earning a slap on the face, while Mary joked that Highsmith loved the smell of turpentine, which Mary had drunk while pregnant, hoping to miscarry. Highsmith sought vengeance in her writing; she once wrote an outline for a story in which a young girl tenderly puts her mother to bed before taking out a pair of scissors and plunging them into the woman's heart, smiling.  Beginning in 1964, Mary began writing long-winded letters to her daughter. ''[W]e cannot face the future without confronting the past,'' she wrote. ''It was constantly between us. If it separates us completely -- let it. I've lost nothing -- because I had nothing.'' Highsmith would volley back the blame, suggesting that all her character defects, including her queerness, were Mary's fault. Highsmith pleaded for the letters to cease, but Mary seemingly couldn't resist continuing the attacks for one more round. In 1974, the year before her house in Fort Worth burned down, forcing her to move into a care facility, Mary penned her last surviving rebuke: ''Well, you've done it -- broken my heart,'' she wrote. ''Don't write -- I shan't.''  Macabre Attractions  Throughout her life, Highsmith resisted speaking publicly about her sexuality. She had grown up feeling alienated and confused by her desires, and this played a major part in her love of all things considered ''perverse.'' Yet that early alienation did not prevent her from embracing her wants as an adult and indulging in the pleasures of promiscuity. She enjoyed infatuations that satiated her appetite for the macabre. In 1948, Highsmith met Ann Smith, a painter and designer, in Provincetown, Mass., and by the end of the day the two were making love among a pile of ropes by a wharf, their efforts impeded only slightly by the bloody cuts covering Smith's legs -- earlier, she had slid down a piling covered in mussels, scraping her legs). Highsmith had helped her wipe off the blood as a prelude to their passion.  From an early age, suicide seemed to haunt Highsmith's affairs. A girl Highsmith dated in high school told Highsmith of how she'd found her mother with her head in the oven, arriving just in time to pull her out. During her time at Barnard College, Highsmith dated a woman named Virginia whom Highsmith thought looked like the writer Virginia Woolf, and whose cruel affections toward Highsmith became fodder for the latter's fiction. ''Must write something good to calm & satisfy myself,'' Highsmith wrote after agonizing over the affair. Years later, Highsmith would become involved with sociologist Ellen Hill, whom the author characterized as ''humorless,'' and the pair would fight so violently that Hill once tore the shirt off Highsmith's back. After another fight, as Highsmith was storming out, Hill swallowed a fistful of pills that put her in a coma. She wasn't the first of Highsmith's lovers to try taking her own life: Allela Cornell, a boyish painter with whom Highsmith had a brief but intense relationship, attempted suicide -- albeit years after dating Highsmith and purportedly over another woman -- by drinking nitric acid. She awoke in the hospital expressing regret and a renewed love of life, only to slip into a coma and die the following month.  These sorts of romances could be mirrored in Highsmith's fiction -- thrillers in which seduction was more like a criminal pursuit. After what would turn out to be a life-defining encounter with a beautiful blonde woman at the Bloomingdale's toy department who would become Highsmith's muse for Carol in ''The Price of Salt'' (1952), Highsmith, acting every bit the stalker, secretly followed the woman to her home in New Jersey. ''I felt quite close to murder too,'' she wrote. ''To arrest her suddenly, my hands upon her throat (which I should really like to kiss).'' Highsmith must have sensed some dark desperation in the mysterious blonde; according to Wilson's biography, five months before ''The Price of Salt'' was published (under a pseudonym), the woman sealed herself in her garage and turned on the car's engine, gassing herself to death.  A Love of Snails  In 1946, while walking past a New York City fish market, Highsmith spotted two snails locked in a loving embrace. Intrigued, she took them home, placed them in a fishbowl and watched their wriggling copulation, spellbound. As was typical of Highsmith, she was riveted by what others found repulsive or nauseating. ''They give me a sort of tranquility,'' she said of the gastropods. ''It is quite impossible to tell which is the male and which is the female, because their behavior and appearance are exactly the same,'' she wrote elsewhere.  Highsmith's fascination with snails only grew from there. She reportedly kept three hundred of them in her back garden in Suffolk, England, and once brought about a hundred with her to a cocktail party, hidden along with a large head of lettuce in her handbag, which she delighted in showing to surprised guests. Moving from England to France, Highsmith was prohibited by law from bringing her snails into the country, so she smuggled them in under her breasts, fitting up to ten under each.  Snails first slithered into her fiction in 1947, in a short story called ''The Snail-Watcher.'' In it, a snail enthusiast named Peter Knoppert finds his study has been overwhelmed by the creatures due to their copious breeding, and he is grimly smothered and consumed by them. ''He swallowed a snail,'' Highsmith wrote. ''Choking, he widened his mouth for air and felt a snail crawl over his lips onto his tongue. He was in hell!'' Highsmith's agent deemed the story ''too repellent to show editors,'' but her friends found Highsmith in her gruesome element amusing.  Disappearing Woman  No matter where Highsmith found herself, she felt she didn't belong and often fantasized about disappearing. Growing up, she experienced a shyness that could be so overwhelming that it felt ''like a physical pain,'' Highsmith wrote. When she was older, she traveled widely as a means of escape, living in Mexico, France and England, and completing some of her best work while removed from familiar surroundings.  Her desire to disappear, however, also manifested in ways that were destructive. Around the age of 15, she began to deprive herself of food; years later, she recognized the practice as anorexia, writing about the experience with a similarly emaciated language: ''Saving part of anything, living like a rat. Self-depreciation. Lack of food intake in adolescence, to get attention of parents, also to punish myself, for sex reasons etc.''  As she matured, Highsmith found other, more socially acceptable ways to obscure herself, most frequently with drinking. She downed martinis like water and made a habit of mixing liquors to amplify their effect. Some acquaintances questioned whether they had ever known her sober; the designer Phillip Lloyd Powell once said of Highsmith, ''She was never visibly drunk. Her darkness would be exuded. She was surrounded by a black cloud. She WAS a black cloud.''  With writing, Highsmith could inhabit the life of another. Her favorite disguise was Ripley, who appeared in five of her novels, and whom she came to think of as her double; she once signed off, ''Pat H., alias Ripley.'' But fictional lives only offered a temporary fix. ''There is no depression for a writer,'' she wrote, ''but a return to the Self.''  Daughter of the South  If inconsistency was the mark of a believable character, Highsmith practiced this most adamantly in her politics. She was an out (if not necessarily public) queer woman, a supporter of Margaret Thatcher but an opponent of Ronald Reagan, an unapologetic anti-Semite who wrote angry letters spouting racist remarks and a woman who once read the Bible every morning only to turn around in later life and announce her disbelief in God, blaming religion for most of the world's ills.  The unpredictability of her beliefs could partly be ascribed to her dual upbringing, in New York City's bohemian Greenwich Village and conservative Fort Worth (where she was born). Highsmith's Southern roots were a point of pride her entire life -- she displayed a pair of Confederate swords in every one of her homes and once named the Civil War general Robert E. Lee as her favorite historical figure. Growing up in Fort Worth, she played with Black children in the alley behind her grandmother Willie Mae Coates's home, but Coates was horrified to hear that Highsmith shared a classroom with Black children at her school in New York. Highsmith absorbed this hostility, filling her early notebooks with racially prejudicial thoughts. Later in life, she penned letters discouraging the introduction of Black studies at American colleges and blamed Black and Puerto Rican students for the collapse of the U.S. education system: ''They take one look at those books,'' she wrote, ''[and] they say to themselves cripes, I'll never make it!''  She was even more outspoken about her anti-Semitic views. In 1990, Highsmith wrote an imaginary interview between herself and Yitzhak Shamir, then prime minister of Israel, for a pitch for a German radio show, which refused to air it. As her friend the filmmaker and critic Christa Maerker remembered, ''Out of her came something so ghastly that it could be a Nazi text.'' ''You seem to be courting another Holocaust,'' Highsmith imagined telling Shamir. ''As you might say, we'll hold back Holocaust Number Two out of sheer anti-Semitism.''  A generous reader could see Highsmith's prejudice as politically in favor of the Palestinian cause -- she was prepared to leave her entire fortune to the Intifada -- but her remarks about Jews and Israel were tinged with an acidic hate that went beyond mere political disagreement. '''Jew-hater' is really the proper term for what Patricia Highsmith was,'' wrote one of her biographers, Joan Schenkar, in ''The Talented Miss Highsmith.'' ''When she wasn't calling the Holocaust 'Holocaust, Inc.,' she was referring to it as the 'semicaust''' -- implying that Highsmith was disappointed that the Jewish population hadn't been completely destroyed.  Analyzing the Psychopath  As a child, Highsmith considered Dr. Karl Menninger's ''The Human Mind'' (1930), which helped introduce psychiatry to the American masses, to be one of her favorite books. The choice was atypical among her peers, to say the least. While other children read stories of witches and dragons, Highsmith marveled at the abnormalities stirring within every individual. She was fascinated by the mind's shadowy realms, and this fascination no doubt contributed to her decision, in the late 1940s, to pursue therapy.  Highsmith initially sought help to ''get myself into a condition to be married,'' she wrote. She wanted to marry Marc Brandel, a friend of hers who wouldn't stop proposing, but she had some obvious aversions to sleeping with him, later describing their attempts at intercourse as feeling like ''steel wool in the face, a sensation of being raped in the wrong place.''  In mid-20th-century New York, analysis was the mark of the intellectual elite. It also promised what was thought to be a legitimate path to curing homosexuality, which ''The Human Mind'' listed as a perversion akin to pedophilia or satanism. In America, homosexuality was not only a psychological disease but a criminal act. It is unsurprising, then, that Highsmith harbored a soft spot for criminals, who comprised a club of which she no doubt felt herself to be a member.  Highsmith's analyst Eva Klein Lipshutz concluded that most of Highsmith's neuroses were caused by her mother; Highsmith was thrilled to receive this diagnosis. Like many psychoanalysts of the time, Lipshutz believed homosexuality could be conquered (she told Highsmith that sex with a man was perfectly normal: ''Everyone does it'') and suggested Highsmith join a group of three or four married women who were also in therapy as ''latent homosexuals.'' ''Perhaps I shall amuse myself by seducing a couple of them,'' Highsmith wrote.  Eventually, Highsmith dropped analysis. ''Bloody angry at having to pay this bill before I leave,'' she wrote after her final session. Instead, she found other outlets. In her youth, she had begun diligently recording her dreams and fantasies in her journals -- visions of ghostly girls waltzing to Tchaikovsky or girls set on fire in their bathtubs; the ghastlier the better -- using them as inspirations for new writing. At least one close friend noticed how Highsmith also found equilibrium when painting or drawing, her inner demons quieted by her studies of shape and form and color. ''We'll never know how much she might have refined and enlarged herself as a visual artist had she chosen to follow that particular calling,'' Highsmith's lifelong friend and fellow Barnard classmate Kate Kingsley Skattebol said. ''It was art, even more than love, that released her inborn creativity and showered her with torrents of joy.''  Private Citizen  Highsmith was an intensely private woman. Even in her journals, she felt the need to censor herself. In a pair of entries from 1935, Highsmith wrote, ''I cannot write what I want. Suppressions.'' And then again, ''[Mother] says I am very x and I think so myself for the first time.'' Any reference to homosexuality appeared under the opaque acronym N.O.E.P.S. (Notes On Ever Present Subject). She even toyed with the idea of destroying her journals before she died, thankfully deciding against doing so.  Her queerness was an obvious explanation for her privacy. From an early age, Highsmith wondered whether she might be a boy. ''I am a walking perpetual example of my contention: as I said brilliantly at the age of twelve, a boy in a girl's body.'' She mirrored her attraction to the androgyny of snails in her own clothes -- she liked wearing Brooks Brothers shirts and pants or Levi's and neckerchiefs. Even a fortune teller in New Orleans told Highsmith's mother, when her daughter was 27, that Highsmith was meant to have been born a boy, and the story haunted Highsmith.  But Highsmith's need for secrecy was also symptomatic of the time in which she was living. Paranoia -- brought on by living as a queer woman in the 1950s, by McCarthyism and by the Cold War -- invaded Highsmith's thoughts to an extreme degree. Her most successful novels conjured this dread; in the opening scene of ''The Talented Mr. Ripley'' (1955), we meet Ripley in a state of suspicion. He senses he is being pursued by a shadowy figure: ''There was no doubt the man was after him,'' he thinks, thrilled by the pursuit, a coded form of gay cruising, yet fearful of capture and forever seeking escape.  Only in the privacy of her own mind did Highsmith feel she could acknowledge her truest nature. ''What do they know,'' she wrote in 1942, ''of my fury, impatience, frustration, ambition, energy, desperation, loves & hates, and of my ecstasies!? Nothing! & they never can.'' Once again, Highsmith refutes herself; she made it her life's work to put those most secretive selves to paper, laying herself bare.  Rennie McDougall has written for The Observer, Slate, The Los Angeles Review of Books and Lapham's Quarterly.  Rolf Tietgens, ''Patricia Highsmith'' (1942). (PHOTOGRAPH BY Rolf Tietgens, Courtesy Keith de Lellis Gallery, New York FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00038 "
248		"   NON Kingpins  By John Carreyrou  1,476 words 25 April 2021   1     EMPIRE OF PAIN  The Secret History of the Sackler Dynasty  By Patrick Radden Keefe  In April 2019, the comedian John Oliver devoted a segment of his satirical newscast on HBO to the Sacklers, owners of the company that makes the powerful painkiller OxyContin. Public anger toward the family for seeding America's opioid epidemic was building, and Oliver added to the opprobrium that evening by lampooning statements made by one of its members in court documents that had recently become public. Under the circumstances, you might have expected the Sacklers to feel chastened and lie low. But that would be badly underestimating their callousness.  Jacqueline Sackler, who married into the clan, tried to get Oliver to kill the segment before it aired. When that didn't work, she sent an angry email to others in the family lamenting that the show was her son's favorite and complaining that the unwanted media attention was interfering with his high school prospects. ''Lives of children are being destroyed,'' she railed, apparently unaware how entitled and tone-deaf she sounded.  This is one of many infuriating passages in Patrick Radden Keefe's ''Empire of Pain: The Secret History of the Sackler Dynasty.'' Put simply, this book will make your blood boil.  Some 500,000 Americans have died from opioid-related overdoses since 1999, and millions more have become hopelessly addicted. Not all of this wreckage can be laid at the feet of the Sacklers, but a lot of it can. By aggressively promoting OxyContin, their company, Purdue Pharma, ushered in a new paradigm under which doctors began routinely prescribing the potent and dangerously addictive narcotics. In the process, the Sacklers became fabulously rich, reaping, according to one expert's court testimony, some $13 billion.  The broad contours of this story are well known. Hundreds of news articles and several books have been written about it, most notably ''Pain Killer,'' by the former new_york_times reporter Barry Meier. Keefe comes late to the party and he's careful to credit Meier and others for their trailblazing journalism (Meier even appears as a character in several chapters). But what would normally be a weakness becomes a strength because Keefe, a New Yorker staff writer and the author of, among other books, the prizewinning ''Say Nothing'' (2019), a history of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, is blessed with great timing. In the past few years, numerous lawsuits filed against Purdue by state attorneys general, cities and counties have finally cracked open the Sacklers' dome of secrecy. Thousands of court documents have become public through discovery, including internal company emails and memos that give new insight into the family's actions and thinking. Keefe combines this wealth of new material with his own extensive reporting -- he spoke to more than 200 people (though the Sacklers themselves declined to be interviewed) -- to paint a devastating portrait of a family consumed by greed and unwilling to take the slightest responsibility or show the least sympathy for what it wrought.  While other accounts of the opioid crisis have tended to focus on the victims, ''Empire of Pain'' stays tightly focused on the perpetrators. The first part of the book chronicles the life of the family's patriarch, Arthur Sackler, the eldest of three brothers born in the early 1900s to Jewish immigrant parents in working-class Brooklyn. Arthur has little, if any, connection to the modern-day Purdue Pharma other than the fact that he owned a third of the company's first incarnation, Purdue Frederick, until his death in 1987. But Keefe makes the case, mostly convincingly, that Arthur invented the drug-promotion playbook Purdue later took a page from when it started selling OxyContin. In an eerie parallel, we learn that Arthur made much of his nine-figure fortune as the adman who marketed the tranquilizer Valium and turned it into the pharmaceutical industry's first blockbuster. Of course, Valium too was addictive and, in 1973, after its maker, Roche, had sold hundreds of millions of dollars of the drug, it became a controlled substance.  While Arthur's life makes for fascinating reading -- he had three wives and became an avid collector of Asian art, negotiating a secret deal with the Met to store his coveted collection in one of the museum's wings free of charge -- he played no role in the OxyContin saga, which made me question Keefe's decision to devote fully one-third of the book to him. Arthur's heirs, who after his death sold their stake in Purdue to his brothers, Raymond and Mortimer, will surely bemoan this choice. They blame the other two branches of the family for soiling the Sackler name, one heir referring to them as the ''OxySacklers.''  It's hard not to agree with them. Arthur may have been the first to blur the lines between medicine and commerce, and he pioneered modern drug marketing, but his sins pale compared with those of the OxySacklers. Especially with those of his nephew Richard Sackler, who was president of Purdue Pharma from 1999 to 2003 and continued to exert a strong influence on the business for years afterward from his perch on the board. It was Richard who pushed to develop OxyContin in the 1990s and who led the charge to market it for routine pain when the F.D.A. approved it in 1995, urging Purdue's army of sales reps to unleash a ''blizzard of prescriptions.''  For a long time, Richard's and his cousins' involvement was obscured by the family's secrecy and by loyal employees' willingness to fall on their swords, such as when three Purdue executives pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor count of misbranding in a 2006 settlement with the Justice Department. But the trove of documents that has since come to light through the multidistrict litigation, which Keefe weaves into a highly readable and disturbing narrative, shatters any illusion that the Sacklers were in the dark about what was going on at the company. The fingerprints of the Raymond and Mortimer branches are all over Purdue's misdeeds. OxyContin was their cash cow and they milked every last dollar from it despite knowing what it was doing to the country.  Keefe came to his subject in a roundabout way: He'd been reporting on Mexican drug cartels when he noticed their increasing reliance on heroin sales -- a development closely linked to the exponential rise in prescription opioid use. When addicts couldn't get their hands on OxyContin, or when a new formulation made it harder to crush the pills and extract their payload, they graduated to heroin.  The narco trafficking analogy, it turns out, is apt. There are some obvious parallels between El Chapo and the Sinaloa cartel and the Sacklers and Purdue. Like the Mexican drug lord, the Sacklers used their money to persuade people to do their bidding -- from the F.D.A. reviewer who landed a $400,000-a-year job at Purdue barely a year after approving OxyContin to the former U.S. attorney who went from being one of the first to raise alarm bells about the drug to becoming a company consultant after he left office. And like El Chapo, the Sacklers threatened and intimidated those they couldn't put on the payroll. That may have included Keefe himself, who noticed a man watching his house from a parked S.U.V. last summer, in all likelihood, he thought, a private investigator hired by one of the law or crisis management firms advising the family. (When Keefe asked the Sacklers about the surveillance, a representative of the family declined to comment.)  If there's one difference between El Chapo and the Sacklers, it's that El Chapo is paying for his crimes with a life sentence in a supermax prison in Colorado while the Sacklers get to hold onto their freedom and most of their money. But with the help of this damning book, there's one thing they'll never recover despite their penchant for putting their name on museums: their reputation.  John Carreyrou, a former reporter for The Wall Street Journal, is the author of ''Bad Blood: Secrets and Lies in a Silicon Valley Startup.'' He is currently host and senior editor at Three Uncanny Four, a podcasting company. EMPIRE OF PAIN The Secret History of the Sackler Dynasty By Patrick Radden Keefe Illustrated. 535 pp. Doubleday. $32.50.  Richard Sackler, of Purdue Pharma, in an image from a 2015 deposition video.; Pill bottles symbolizing deaths caused by opioid overdoses; Jacqueline and Mortimer Sackler in 2013; Jonathan Sackler (far right) at a gala for the American Federation for Children in 2014. (JESSICA HILL/ASSOCIATED PRESS; DAVID M. BENETT/GETTY IMAGES; KENTUCKY ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE; SYLVAIN GABOURY/PATRICK MCMULLAN, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (BR20)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00030 "
249		"   House & Home/ Record Yourself For Posterity  By Erik Vance  1,355 words 25 April 2021   8     Once a year I record a brutally honest conversation for my little boy. Here's why that's psychologically healthy for both of us.  A couple of months ago, as I do every year, I had an hourlong conversation with my 20-something son. Which might seem strange, since the kid is currently only 5.  Did I invent a time machine? Tap into a micro-wormhole of some kind? Nope, I used an audio recorder. It's something I started doing a few years back after the morbid realization that if I was hit by a bus or fell off a cliff, my son would have only the dimmest memories of his dad.  And even if I do live to see my boy become a man, I won't be the same me anymore. This current, slightly panicked version of me will certainly die. It has also become clear that I get progressively less interesting as I age. In my youth I climbed mountains and hitchhiked in Southeast Asia. These days I work at a desk and worry about how much the plumber will cost.  So, every year around his birthday, I talk to the 22-year-old version of my son for about an hour. And I am honest -- brutally honest -- which is the only way this works. I tell him my fears, my prejudices and my hopes for him. I just talk like he's a buddy. I laugh, gush and tell weird stories.  Aside from being a little free therapy for myself, it turns out this odd tradition might also be good for my son. It may be that when I'm ready to give him these recordings in, say, 15 years or so, they will provide comfort during a tricky stage in his development.  ''This is such a beautiful way to preserve the integrity of memories and reflections and lock them in time,'' said Dr. Neha Chaudhary, a psychiatrist at Massachusetts General Hospital. ''When that child is older, and they're reflecting on who they are, they're developing their core identity.'' It's a time to fight off their own fear and insecurity, ''and wonder, 'Man, did my parents feel this way?'''  Dr. Chaudhary suggested I someday listen to these recordings alongside my son, so that we can discuss them and grow closer as a result. This terrifies me, since I'm quite sure that I sound like a half-drunk Muppet in many of them.  There aren't any formal experiments involving children and audio time capsules, but Dr. Victor Carrion, a psychiatrist specializing in adolescents, said my little tradition of sharing my hopes and fears fits with what we know about how young adults' brains work. A child's brain reaches maturity in his mid-20s, gaining not just processing power but also empathy for others and a sense of self.  ''It's a period of exploration, it's the period of figuring out who you really are,'' said Dr. Carrion, who directs the Stanford Early Life Stress Resilience Program. ''You've been asking the 'Who am I' question now for a while, but at 20 you're starting to feel like, 'I need to have an answer.'''  So not only are you searching for your identity, but you are also able to empathize with others, even your parents. You are stepping out from the nest and looking for the trade winds that will throw you around for the next 60 years. And the people who can best help you, the ones who coaxed you through the first 20 years, probably don't remember what it was like to be floundering on a fickle breeze. Or their memories have been altered by time, Dr. Chaudhary said.  When I look back to my 20s, I see a linear path to where I am today. Things happened for a reason, preparing me for the life I would lead. But that's just my brain trying to create a narrative out of chaos, something brains excel at.  But if I were to rev up a time machine and return to the chaos of my 20s, Dr. Carrion pointed out that I would mostly see anxiety and confusion (punctuated by a lot of deep-dish pizza). Because I was living in a soup of chaos and impulse control.  ''One of the reasons why you don't have complete control of impulsivity is because you're supposed to make mistakes,'' Dr. Carrion said. ''This is the time to make mistakes and take chances and take risks and get burned.''  He believes that if young people try to skip their impulsive years, they may be forced to experience them later in life. But in the moment, mistakes in your 20s aren't much fun, and there is value in young people seeing that their parents also made mistakes. I want my son to see that his dad actually wasn't effortlessly gliding on the wind but, in fact, mostly was flying backward with one wing wrapped around his leg and the other one covering his eyes.  Perri Chinalai, a director at an organization called StoryCorps, which aims to preserve regular people's stories, has been collecting audio messages like mine for 12 years, as well as those of people who are about to die or whose memories are failing. She said the key to this type of storytelling is to find a balance between chronology -- simply listing off events -- and reflecting on those events.  ''It's not just that I lived through this, or this happened, it's: 'This is the way it changed me. This is the way that it changed the way I view the world,''' Ms. Chinalai said.  She tells people who are planning to pass along an audio diary to their children to start with how much they love their kids and are proud of them. Saying it to a machine can also become practice. ''Once you can say it on tape, you can say it in person,'' she said.  But the most important thing is that you say something. So many people, she said, don't think their stories are worth telling and years later their families would give anything to just hear them talking about the weather. She said a year like this one, when the world seems turned upside down, is a perfect time to start.  Dr. Chaudhary said an honest monologue will help my son understand where he came from and how he might fit into society when he needs it most. For some young people, that means understanding their heritage or the trauma wrought on their ancestors. The renowned psychologist Selma Fraiberg called these histories the ''ghosts in the nursery'' that later define our own behavioral norms. But the ghosts that shape us don't have to be trauma; they can also be a mom's weird sense of humor or a dad's way of maintaining order.  ''We're always passing something down as parents to the next generation,'' Dr. Chaudhary said. ''Being able to dig into the family of origin, in a way where we're eliminating the biases of time, might be really fruitful and really helpful.''  My message to my son this year was not overflowing with help or hope. Mostly it was griping about lockdowns and the fear of watching hundreds of thousands of my countrymen die from disease. But the young man who hears it will probably see the pandemic with a more intimate viewpoint than he'll find in history class.  Maybe my present chaos will seem quaint to him compared to his own struggles finding his identity and purpose. Maybe some version of me will be there to guide him, maybe not. But as I sit down every year to talk to that young man, at least I know this version, with less wisdom but a clearer view of today, will be there to help him through.  Erik Vance is an editor on the Well desk.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Daniel Salmieri FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002z "
250		"    Deep Breath  By Patrick Nathan  1,048 words 25 April 2021   17     THE RECENT EAST  By Thomas Grattan  It's a unique, if common, cruelty to transplant a child who is just putting down roots. For those pulled and relocated, there's a thirstiness -- and a little guarded ring of bark -- that those with stable childhoods lack. In ''The Recent East,'' a wonderful, immersive debut novel from the writer and teacher Thomas Grattan, we're given an intimate look at these wood cuttings, as seen through three generations of one family, each moved across an ocean just before blooming.  In 1968, Beate is 12. Germany is divided by the Berlin Wall and she lives in the East with her family, but her parents have acquired fake passports and intend to defect -- first to West Germany, then England, then the United States. At the border, they tell the soldiers they are ''returning'' after visiting an ill cousin. Upset at leaving home, Beate is tempted to tell the truth, just to spite her parents. Yet she stays quiet and becomes a defector -- a new kernel of identity her English and American teachers, classmates and friends want her to lean into: ''There was nothing like trauma survived to let others remember for a while that their boredom was a luxury.'' Having escaped communism makes Beate ''interesting'' -- and lonely.  Jump to 1990. Beate, now in upstate New York, receives a letter. The Berlin Wall has fallen. The childhood home she left behind, the government explains, is now hers. Here is where the novel's heft earns its great, beautiful weight. Beate decides to move back to Germany, returning with children of her own. Her son, Michael, who is 13, relishes his snipped roots and enjoys unsupervised nights of parties, vandalism, drugs and gay sex. Her daughter, Adela, who is 12, reads about the Stasi, about Mengele, about anything that might ''explain how people's meanness could metastasize.'' She spends her days with her cousin, Udo, whose inability to accept Germany's history ultimately (and dramatically) results in Adela being sent back to America to live with her father. Later, Adela marries, splits and returns to Germany. It's 2009. Her child, Peter, bonds with her family. Beate has thrived. Michael owns a gay bar. All are deeply aggrieved, terribly lonely. All love one another.  Another jump: In 2016, a teenage Peter is distraught as Beate (his ''Oma'') puts the old, baggy, fiercely lived-in house up for sale. In what may be this young person's first telescopic image of time, he notices her presence: ''She was here, as the great-several-times-over grandfather had once been. Also Oma's parents, whom she talked about sometimes and got sad, though she said she was happy remembering them. Perhaps one day he would think of her in the same way. Perhaps he'd have someone who'd want to hear stories of Oma in this house and in Cologne.''  ''The Recent East'' is, in so many ways, a novel of life -- at least in James Salter's sense: ''Life is weather. Life is meals.'' As in many great novels, time is perhaps its most magnetic character. Our lives are time spent, and it's a deep, expansive pleasure to spend a little of ours as these characters spend their own.  Most extraordinarily, Grattan gives us not only life, but a good life, the rarity of which in fiction (and increasingly, reality) is a shame. Is happiness really so uninteresting? Is contentment? Both seem to have developed that reputation, but in Grattan's hands, life's joys are magnetic. Michael, enjoying his newfound gay freedom, thinks of his new city as ''a shelter dog ready to roll over and follow you forever if you approached with a soft voice and gentle hand.'' When he meets another gay boy his age, his afternoon feels ''like a giant soap bubble. Pop, he thought, but it kept going.'' Beate, as a teenager, asks her boyfriend ''to move into her and stay for a while. He is inside of me, she'd thought, and it felt like they were breaking an impossible barrier.'' After a great deal of loss, grief, frustration and loneliness dealt to these characters, their joys arrive as they would in real life: like gifts we can scarcely believe are happening.  Even among the absolute, unequivocal horrors of Eastern Europe in the 1990s -- neo-Nazis, xenophobic violence, police officers who sit ''in their cruisers a block away, waiting for something to happen,'' displaced refugees, homeless encampments, ''the fascist who worked at the grocery store'' and hate crimes, all of them mournfully recognizable in 2021 -- there is room for life. Room, even, for beauty, which Grattan delivers with graceful economy. Watching Michael's gay vocabulary of gestures is ''like seeing a heron swoop to a landing, a spider spin a corner into silver.'' At a seething, teenage party, ''smoke hovered above the crowd like cartoon thinking.'' An abandoned bathroom has had ''toilets pulled from it like rotten teeth.'' Like all beauties, these are dilations of time. Where our present era of decimated attention demands contraction and diminishment, ''The Recent East'' offers expansion; it artfully holds open a needed space -- to wander, to contemplate, to notice. Even just to breathe. Like the house in the novel, life is so much larger than we remember.  Nervously crossing the border, a young Beate hides her ears under her hair. She imagines them ''like the leaves of a houseplant, thin and large and loath to hide from the sun.'' Perhaps this is what made me think of roots, of plants asked to bloom without soil they trust. But bloom Beate does, and so do her children, and so do theirs. Grattan's true talent is patience. I think it's only now that I've realized where it is these characters grow. One name for it is family. The other, no matter who offers it, is love. I'm grateful this novel could take me there.  Patrick Nathan is the author of ''Some Hell.'' His second book, ''Image Control: Art, Fascism, and the Right to Resist,'' is forthcoming in August. THE RECENT EAST By Thomas Grattan 357 pp. MCD/Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $27.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Leonardo Santamaria FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002y "
251		"    Eight Ways of Looking at Haruki Murakami  By David Means  2,480 words 25 April 2021   14     FIRST PERSON SINGULAR  Stories  By Haruki Murakami  Translated by Philip Gabriel  Magic  All fiction is magic. That's the thought that occurred to me often as I read ''First Person Singular,'' the brilliant new book of stories by Haruki Murakami, author of international best sellers.  The freezing man in Kafka's ''Bucket Rider'' floats above icy streets in a bucket, asks a couple for coal and then flies away when he is refused. In Langston Hughes's neglected ''On the Road,'' a homeless Black man who is denied help by a white pastor grabs the stone pillars of a church and pulls it down -- and we accept it. As long as we've been properly grounded by a careful set of instructions, we readers will have visions.  Whatever you want to call Murakami's work -- magic realism, supernatural realism -- he writes like a mystery tramp, exposing his global readership to the essential and cosmic (yes, cosmic!) questions that only art can provoke: What does it mean to carry the baggage of identity? Who is this inside my head in relation to the external, so-called real world? Is the person I was years ago the person I am now? Can a name be stolen by a monkey?  The Bridge  Murakami is wildly popular around the world, which makes him somewhat suspect in literary circles. Because his style has supposedly drawn too much from the West, some Japanese critics have labeled it batakusai, which translates roughly to ''stinking of butter.'' His reputation, by his own admission, is better internationally than it is in Japan.  His novels -- the astonishing ''Wind-Up Bird Chronicle,'' the sprawling ''1Q84'' -- spiral like galaxies from central cores, but his stories are quasars, exploding with light as they reveal his themes. I've begun to think of Murakami's works as teaching stories, like ''Tales of the Dervishes,'' by Idries Shah, or even the Parables. His great subject is ultimately the enigma of time as it relates to the inner self, to the musical mystery underneath everything.  In what feels like a classic example of the anxiety of influence, Murakami has long pushed back against the weight of Kenzaburo Oe, whose 1964 book ''A Personal Matter'' exemplified the Japanese I-novel, a form of autofiction before autofiction was even a word, and took the literary world by storm. But recently, in an introduction to ''The Penguin Book of Japanese Short Stories,'' he admitted that his I-novel allergy had become less intense. One can feel him easing up in the eight stories collected in ''First Person Singular,'' allowing his own voice -- or what sounds like his own voice, wonderfully translated by Philip Gabriel -- to enter the narratives, creating a confessional tone that reminded me of Alice Munro's late work.  Murakami is not popular throughout the world because he consciously integrates Western ideas and language into his fiction, but because his work -- fueled by a tension with his forebears -- fuses cultures, or perhaps leaps over them, defying time, beating like pop songs, touching universal nerves.  Charlie Parker  Tom Waits once said that ''if you want to catch songs you gotta start thinking like one,'' and you could imagine Murakami's process as an extension of this, catching stories via musical thinking, whether it's jazz in ''Charlie Parker Plays Bossa Nova,'' pop in ''With the Beatles'' or classical in ''Carnaval,'' all included in this collection. There's a constant interplay in the book between the way music works and the way narrative unfolds. (If you want to get a sense of Murakami's physical relationship to music, read his wonderful, intimate discussions with the conductor Seiji Ozawa, in ''Absolutely on Music.'')  In a recent radio interview he claimed that music was his writing teacher -- just as he has said that his writing is informed by his distance running. (But that's too simple. All writers attempt to find some hook to explain the unexplainable.)  ''Charlie Parker Plays Bossa Nova'' is a fanfic love song, powered by a compassionate desire to resurrect. It starts with a review of an imaginary Parker album, written as a lighthearted prank by the narrator when he was a college student. But years later, to his bewilderment, he spots this nonexistent record in a store on East 14th Street.  Murakami gives himself a chance to talk to Parker, through a dream his narrator has at the end of the piece. Bird speaks to us; he's real. The story becomes a tender reclamation of the past, written with devotion and love, powered by a beautiful truth: that the artists we love are constantly resurrected by our experience of their work.  (Reading it, I got the same feeling I got watching the late Chadwick Boseman in ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' and when I searched Spotify later, it made sense that someone had already created a playlist, an imagined album from the story, which made me think about the destabilizing forces that feed our visions: the shaky world of postwar Japan, perhaps, for Murakami, who was born in 1949 amid wreckage and a sudden infusion of new cultures, or a larger contemporary world in which cultures now destabilize one another, collapsing time and distance, creating wonderful new art -- a Bad Bunny song, sung in Spanish, pulsing on a trap beat crafted in Los Angeles, drifting atop a roar of digital current.)  Reality  Sometimes I think we forget, or refuse to admit, that as soon as a story exists in print and is read, it becomes real. Maybe it's time we simply retire the term ''magic realism,'' because all fictions are both realistic and magical.  There are two opposite tendencies in literature, according to Italo Calvino: ''One tries to make language into a weightless element that hovers above things like a cloud. ... The other tries to give language the weight, density and concreteness of things, bodies and sensations.'' Murakami has found his own path -- as light as a runner between strides, floating for a few seconds in the zero gravity of movement, and as heavy as the footfalls on the soles of his Mizuno running shoes. Like Raymond Carver's work, Murakami's stories -- his early ones in particular -- are guided by clear, strong voices that are deceptively easy to read, digestible but always leading to a precise pivot, from that seemingly smooth gloss of realism, toward a deeper musical wisdom.  The Beatles  ''With the Beatles'' opens with a young woman walking down a school hallway, clutching a Beatles album, and becoming an image the narrator will never forget (he never sees her again). The narrator -- as observed by his older self -- then remembers his first girlfriend and an autumn day in 1965, when he went to her house for a date, found her gone and instead spent time with her brother, who suffered from acute memory loss.  To kill time, waiting for the young woman to arrive, he read aloud the final section of the 1927 story ''Spinning Gears,'' by Ryunosuke Akutagawa. Later, when we leap forward several years to a chance encounter with the brother, up in the mountains of Kobe, and learn of a tragedy that recalls the fate of Akutagawa, who killed himself shortly after writing his astonishingly contemporary story, we see Murakami bowing to one of his literary ancestors. An indelible imprint, the narrative power of the past.  (Describing how these stories succeed is like trying to describe exactly why, more than 50 years later, a Beatles song still sounds fresh -- the songwriting energies from the psychedelic John Lennon combined with the hard-core realism of Paul McCartney forming a singular vision. I'm tempted to say here that Murakami's vast popularity comes from the fact that he's a fusion of Lennon and McCartney [and perhaps Glenn Gould].)  Cream  Murakami forces us into our past, when we were young enough to believe in the old, hippie word ''cosmic,'' when we could all get high just by trying to imagine a circle with no circumference.  A teenager ends up on a mountaintop in Kobe, sitting in a garden, listening to an old man talk. ''Your brain is made to think about difficult things,'' the man explains. ''To help you get to a point where you understand something that you didn't understand at first. You can't be lazy or neglectful. Right now is a critical time. Because this is the period when your brain and your heart form and solidify.''  Was the plot of this story, ''Cream,'' just a MacGuffin to get us to this scene? Maybe, but who cares? We're right there with them in that garden, and we have learned again what it means to seek mystery. That's how Murakami's stories often roll, luring us into strange moments, making us ask the questions we once chewed on about life, about what it means to bear the burden of selfhood, about how time seems to bend around us like the wind around the trees -- invisible but clearly active.  As a short story writer myself, I feel my own acute inability to urge the reader to spend time with this collection, to purchase a sequence of brief experiences that will not, as a novel might, immerse them in the hours of a steadily unfurling narrative. But these are flickering, quick times, and what a story can do that a novel can't is pull us into the intricate motions of a single instant, expansive on both ends -- the before of everything before the narrative begins, and the infinite future beyond the terminal sentences -- and, like a song, or a poem, leave us wanting to reread, to rehear the voice, to relocate the pinpoint in the map of our lives.  The Stone Pillow  Let's turn now to a one-time hookup (the translator's word) and explore the nature of erotic bliss -- the distance between touch and memory. The tone, as in all of the stories in this book, is autumnal, and failures of memory are openly admitted. A young woman writes tanka poems, and when she and her lover end up naked in each other's arms, she warns him that when she orgasms, she will yell the name of someone else. He's fine with this but he asks her to bite a towel because the walls are thin.  ''Loving someone is like having a mental illness that's not covered by health insurance,'' she explains. (Again, we're back to some place we've forgotten, young enough to seek, to feel the wildness of reality, just as we might feel listening to Patti Smith -- perhaps Murakami's most devoted fan -- singing ''Dancing Barefoot.'')  The story, ''The Stone Pillow,'' flows to a moment years later, when the narrator finds a tattered book, the young woman's, and reads a few of the poems, opening up one of Murakami's profoundly beautiful arias:  ''If we're blessed, though, a few words might remain by our side. They climb to the top of the hill during the night, crawl into small holes dug to fit the shape of their bodies, stay quiet still, and let the stormy winds of time blow past. The dawn finally breaks, the wild wind subsides, and the surviving words quietly peek out from the surface. For the most part they have small voices -- they are shy and only have ambiguous ways of expressing themselves. Even so, they are ready to serve as witnesses. As honest, fair witnesses. But in order to create those enduring, long-suffering words, or else to find them and leave them behind, you must sacrifice, unconditionally, your own body, your very own heart. You have to lay down your neck on a cold stone pillow illuminated by the winter moon.''  The Monkey  Perhaps the most revelatory story in the book is a sequel to an earlier, widely anthologized piece, ''A Shinagawa Monkey,'' first published in The New Yorker in 2006. In it, a monkey sneaks around Tokyo stealing names -- literally stealing them, so that the victims can't remember their own names. ''It's a sickness I suffer from,'' the monkey says, when he's finally captured and interrogated. ''Once I fix on a name, I can't help myself. Not just any name, mind you. I'll see a name that attracts me, and then I have to have it. I know it's wrong, but I can't control myself.''  All of the victims are young women whom the monkey finds desirable, and given the criticism sometimes leveled at the male gaze in Murakami's work, it can be tempting to read the follow-up, ''Confessions of a Shinagawa Monkey,'' as an overearnest attempt at atonement, an assurance that the impulse was driven by sincere admiration -- love -- not lechery.  ''I make the name of the woman I love a part of me,'' the monkey tells the narrator, over cold beers in a hotel in Gunma Prefecture. It is ''a completely pure, platonic act. I simply possess a great love for that name inside of me, secretly. Like a gentle breeze wafting over a meadow.'' Still, he says, he has made up his mind to stop.  One senses a greater task for the author: probing earlier creative impulses, examining the relationship between his own life and the act of conjuring lives out of nothing. This is the current that runs through all fiction -- the musical frisson between the real and the imagined. What better way to remake, without wholly rejecting, your past self than to re-evaluate your creations, your fictive ghosts?  This story isn't an excusing of the past but a kind of reconciliation, and when, at the end, we realize that it's highly possible that the monkey is still out there stealing names, unable to control himself, we feel that Murakami -- older, wiser, faults acknowledged -- is also out there, making up stories, imagining the other, making that leap over the chasm between real and unreal, thickening, with each tale he creates, the perplexity of his own art.  What does it mean to carry the name of a beloved inside you, the narrator wonders, after his encounter with the monkey. Indeed, what does it mean to carry my beloved wife's name, Genève, inside me? The question amplifies the glory of life -- the loneliness and joy of hauling around the baggage of my own identity, which I'm able to escape only when I'm bearing someone else's story, dreaming my way in.  David Means is the author of five story collections, including ''Instructions for a Funeral,'' and the novel ''Hystopia.'' FIRST PERSON SINGULAR Stories By Haruki Murakami Translated by Philip Gabriel 243 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $28.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jim Stoten FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002x "
252		"    Down and Out in Portland  By Alanna Bennett  690 words 25 April 2021   16     THE NIGHT ALWAYS COMES  By Willy Vlautin  Craftsman and small clapboard houses still dot the streets of Portland, Ore., as they have for over a century, but next to them now you will find walls of steel and glass stretching up into the city's gray skies. If you're familiar with the area, the sight may be chilling. These condos stand in the place of old churches and Boys & Girls Clubs, on lots purchased by developers and sold by families who often had little choice. You may get a sense, looking at half-built 12-unit condominiums with rents twice as high as those families' mortgages, that they're not just replacing the old ways of Portland. They may be replacing everyone who can't keep up.  Lynette, the protagonist of Willy Vlautin's determined new novel, ''The Night Always Comes,'' feels the dread of Portland's transformation down to her bones. This is a novel that lives firmly in the melancholia of the city's gentrification, hurtling readers through one woman's desperation to keep her life afloat in a city that's pushing its working class out, one razed lot at a time.  For years Lynette has been up at 4 a.m. every day. She works two jobs while attending community college and caring for a brother with developmental disabilities (Vlautin never specifies his condition). She does all this with a single goal in mind: to raise enough money to put a down payment on the house her family has lived in for Lynette's whole life. That down payment, in combination with a loan to be taken out by her mother, is the only way for the three to stay together. After years of depression and rage she's worked hard to control, Lynette is bent on controlling this as well. Her dream is simply to chart a future for her family that would allow them to live without the looming specter of displacement.  But when Lynette's mother reneges on the deal, that dream disappears in an instant. Lynette spirals, and most of the novel takes place over a single night as she tears feverishly through Portland, chasing down any lead that might result in some extra cash that could right the situation. Most of the people Lynette meets on this tragic, desperate night do not react kindly, and as the evening turns violent the exhaustion and isolation of her poverty ring clear as day.  The novel, Vlautin's sixth, stalls out during its many long monologues spelling out exactly what each character is thinking in clunky detail. Vlautin's etchings of the city's poor, white population are at times overwrought, especially around the topic of weight, as are the inner lives of anyone who's not the main character. That tendency is extra egregious when it comes to Lynette's mother, a dreary antagonist whose motives no number of monologues manage to three-dimensionalize.  The novel regains its footing, though, in the moments where we get to live in Lynette's inner world. ''The whole city is starting to haunt me,'' Lynette says in the novel's most potent scene. ''All the new places, all the big new buildings, just remind me that I'm nothing, that I'm nobody.'' The central question of her night resonates beyond this one family: Can one person be built to sink, or is she set up to fail by an entire system designed to keep the poor not just working, but hurting? Anyone who's scrambled within the confines of poverty may relate to Lynette's quest for agency over her own fate. With ''The Night Always Comes,'' Vlautin chronicles the downfall of a city. As Lynette's story illustrates, it's an undoing that is deeply personal, too.  Alanna Bennett is a screenwriter for ''Roswell, New Mexico.'' Her culture writing has appeared in BuzzFeed, Teen Vogue, Eater and more. THE NIGHT ALWAYS COMES By Willy Vlautin 208 pp. Harper/HarperCollins Publishers. $26.99.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Agata Nowicka FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002w "
253		"    Four's a Crowd  By Meghan Daum  1,384 words 25 April 2021   10     GOOD COMPANY  By Cynthia D'Aprix Sweeney  It has become a truism that serialized television, notably the kind found on premium cable or streaming networks, has replaced the novel. When dramas like ''The Wire'' and ''The Sopranos'' took over the culture in the early aughts, the cliffhangers and capacious story arcs drew comparisons to Dickens and Thackeray, with audiences gripped in collective suspense as the story teased itself out in their living rooms.  In the days before the stream and binge era, when audiences were forced to wait a week between meals, the peristaltic process had a healthy rhythm. But today's era of full-season dumps and limited series that can be wrapped up in a small handful of airtight episodes has created something of a prepared foods market for television executives. Instead of original scripts and ideas, it's all about ''I.P.'': pre-existing, easily adaptable intellectual property, often in the form of novels.  Writers of novels know this. Moreover, they know that the vicissitudes and changing business model of publishing mean that a novel's success may depend just as much (and sometimes quite a bit more) on its potential for dramatic adaptation as it does on its ability to reach readers. As such, the contemporary novel has become a kind of television treatment, a story bible doing double duty as a literary experience.  ''Good Company,'' the second novel by Cynthia D'Aprix Sweeney, whose 2016 debut, ''The Nest,'' was a walloping best seller, is rich with such biblical qualities. A marriage story set in tony but not ostentatious Los Angeles neighborhoods like Larchmont and Los Feliz, its inciting incident happens in the opening pages, where a wife, going through clutter in the garage, discovers her husband's supposedly long-lost wedding band.  The subsequent 26 chapters amount to a painstaking parsing of the couple's relationship trajectory. Working actors who met decades earlier in New York City, Flora and Julian were denizens of a Greenwich Village bohemia in its last gasps of affordability, raising their small daughter in a cramped apartment, scraping by on Flora's voice-over work and organizing their lives around Good Company, a downtown theater troupe that operates on the edge of debt and mounts productions of ''The Crucible'' because ''it's the perfect allegory for Guantánamo Bay.''  When a television role for Julian instigates a move to Los Angeles, the family is once again close to Flora's best friend, Margot, a famous if not A-list television actress who's long been a sort of surrogate parent to their daughter, Ruby. In a familiar trope of female friendship, Margot is everything Flora is not: effortlessly stylish, benignly narcissistic, an Italian-American of the ''summers in Tuscany'' variety as opposed to Flora's ''Sunday sauce, weekly Mass'' Bay Ridge-Italian. Margot plays a pediatric oncologist on a prime-time medical drama called ''Cedar'' and is married to David, a real-life cardiac surgeon whose life and career were upended by a stroke some years earlier.  Sweeney employs shifting points of view throughout the novel, but the one we're most privy to is Flora's, which is filtered through the slightly shaded prism of the underdog. To her, Margot's house resembles ''every other renovated mansion Flora had ever been in,'' with its closets full of folded white sheets tied with color-coded satin ribbons and a color scheme she derides as ''50 shades of café au lait.'' Hosting a lavish graduation party for Ruby, Margot had considered flying in a catering crew to simulate a New England clambake. Flora was appalled by the overkill and relieved when the plan was scrapped, though ''if she was honest with herself, she'd been tempted.''  The constant internal struggle between what the heart wants versus what it should be grateful it already has serves as the primary emotional engine of ''Good Company.'' (There is also a heart leitmotif -- a heart attack, a heart-shaped locket, an infant heart surgery patient -- that is administered perhaps a bit too thickly.) Margot wants to be taken seriously as an actor rather than just paid handsomely as a TV star. Flora wants to be her own person rather than an appendage of the all-consuming theater company. (She and Julian even have a cutesy couple portmanteau, Florian, which Flora resents.) Most of all, Flora wants Julian to love her a little more ferociously than he was ever inclined to do. In one of the novel's most piercing lines of dialogue, he tells her, early in their relationship, ''I don't know why I'm so ambivalent about you.''  Julian, for his part, seems to want the ballast of family without giving up the train-wreck delights of his bachelor life. The missing ring, we eventually learn (the author, to her credit, makes no pretense of surprising us), is a talisman of betrayal. The remainder of the story is taken up mostly by Flora's indecision over what to do about it.  ''She felt a loosening of something she'd tamped down for a long time, and it didn't feel awful, it felt warm and liquid, and if the feeling were to take a sentient shape it would be an enormous glowing question mark,'' Sweeney writes.  ''Did she still have to accept a name she hated?  ''Did she still love Julian?  ''Did she have to stay married?  ''Did she want to?''  If this sounds like promotional copy for a Netflix poster, well ... success! Reading ''Good Company,'' I found myself mentally auditioning actors for the inevitable series. Tellingly, I did not find myself imagining more than a handful of actual, real-time scenes, because the book doesn't have all that many. Much of the first third of the novel is taken up with back story. We see Flora struggling as a stage actor before finding work as a voice actor. We see Julian struggling with lukewarm love. In a ''meet cute'' so ridiculous that even the writers of ''Cedar'' would probably cut it, we see David, as a young doctor, rush onstage at a Shakespeare in the Park performance after an actor collapses onstage. He performs chest compressions in front of a stunned audience and, upon stabilizing the patient, is approached by Margot, ethereal in her fairy costume, who takes his hands in gratitude. The audience applauds.  In ''The Nest,'' a family saga about inheritance, Sweeney's tendency toward cliché and Hallmark moments was undercut by the sharp edges and dark forces of at least a few characters. ''Good Company'' occasionally gestures in that direction. The woman involved in Julian's betrayal is self-contradictory, even pathetic. The idea that such a person could wield so much sexual and emotional power is fascinating; I wanted more of her and a little less of Flora's good girl hand-wringing.  Similarly, the behind-the-scenes machinations of the ''Cedar'' set offer moments of delicious satire. When Margot learns her character will be killed off, the show's creator, a formidable but anxious doyenne in the Shonda Rhimes vein, indulges her in a brainstorming session about what would make for the most vanity-appeasing demise: ''I'm giving you a kick-ass death. It's going to be so good everyone will clamor to hire you.''  Sweeney is uncommonly skilled at gently lampooning Hollywood. Just as she absolutely nails the formulaic milieu of ''Cedar,'' her description of ''Griffith,'' the animated musical series on which Flora ultimately finds a steady, reasonably satisfying gig voicing a lioness, is pitch perfect. A show where animals at the now-defunct Griffith Park Zoo function as metaphorical representations of Hollywood actors pigeonholed by typecasting and ageism? Someone greenlight that immediately!  Meanwhile, ''Good Company,'' with its pre-scouted locations and fully rendered characters looking for things to do, is a promising piece of I.P. Sweeney may or may not have screenwriting ambitions, but I'd love to see her do something with it.  Meghan Daum's most recent book is ''The Problem With Everything.'' She is the creator and host of The Unspeakable Podcast. GOOD COMPANY By Cynthia D'Aprix Sweeney 307 pp. Ecco. $27.99.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Nhung Le FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002u "
254		"   NON Pick Your Poison  By Alex Beggs  856 words 25 April 2021   13     THE BOOK OF DIFFICULT FRUIT  Arguments for the Tart, Tender, and Unruly (With Recipes)  By Kate Lebo  I've been thinking about how to murder a man with cherry pits. Pie, definitely. I'd pit a few pounds of cherries, then smash the pits and mix with vodka into an almondlike, but poisonous, extract. The chemical compounds in the pits would react with his stomach acid to create bootleg cyanide. It'd take, I estimate, three whole pies for me to pull this off, but still. As Kate Lebo explores in ''The Book of Difficult Fruit,'' within the plant kingdom, there lurk so many potential killers.  My cherry obsession aside, this darkly funny encyclopedia-memoir-essay collection is not a witch's guide to killing your man. Each chapter takes on a different prickly, stinky, tricky, troublesome fruit -- its history and usage in herbalism, its flavor and appeal, its dangers and difficulties -- and ends with recipes. ''In this book, fruit is not the smooth-skinned, bright-hued, waxed and edible ovary of the grocery store,'' Lebo writes in the introduction (waxed ovary!): ''What nurtures and what harms are entangled.'' I turned the page so fast I got a paper cut.  ''Deeply researched'' doesn't begin to describe how far into ancient texts and their subtexts, obscure cookbooks and corners of the internet Lebo excavated to tell us the stories of these fruits. What she digs up for each is often fascinating, sometimes juicy, rarely dry. She interviews experts, including LaRae Wiley, a member of the Colville Confederated Tribes, on picking huckleberries, and Dale from Poison Control (for obvious reasons). In the standout juniper chapter, Lebo searches for evidence that women drank juniper tonics to terminate pregnancies and finds it in an herbalist's guide from 1597 (''Gerard's Herbal'' claimed the plant's ''leaves, when 'boyled in Wine and drunke,' can ... 'expel the dead childe, and kill the quicke''').  The fruit histories ease into essays on figuring out femininity with the help of Bath & Body Works (vanilla), grandfathers holding onto family secrets (elderberry), Kara Walker's ''Sugar Baby'' sculpture (sugar cane) and beautiful pointlessness (sorry, Osage oranges). Along the way, we get morsels of memoir like carefully plucked trail berries. These glimpses reveal Lebo's health-nut mother, who shaped her reverence for the plant world; a romance that brought out Lebo's own difficult fruit tendencies and the one that brought out her best -- the kind of truths you can't find in a library.  Every fruit is ripe for metaphor for Lebo, who is both a poet and a baker. She resists giving symbolism too much power, but it's hard when you realize that the needy ex-boyfriend is like an Italian plum tree, a novelty to care for who soon becomes an intolerable burden.  Sometimes ideas are poison, too. At the turn of the 20th century, the Darwinian botanist Luther Burbank bred blackberries to be thornless and nonthreatening. Turns out Burbank had similar ideas about breeding the human race. In Burbank's ''The Training of the Human Plant,'' Lebo notes, ''we see how it can be dangerous to compare people to plants. How, taken to their extreme logical conclusions, such metaphors become -- as they always half were -- inhuman.''  This was the moment you, er, I, person who took one Derrida class in college, realized maybe this book isn't about fruit at all, but about language. That maybe encyclopedias, so neatly alphabetized, are presented as complete knowledge of the world, yet end up being as useful as a metaphor. You get halfway to truth, but the more you read about thimbleberries, the more you just want to taste their ''rich, raspberry-like flavor that's more intense than one would expect, as if it's been concentrated by gentle heat.'' I'd love to smell durian, which Lebo describes as ''strawberries and old garlic,'' and ''sweet and trashy, like a cantaloupe that's been left in the car.''  ''The Book of Difficult Fruit'' is brimming with obscure knowledge that's going to loom over every gin martini I drink for the next decade, and there are fantastic recipes too. Blackberry shrub, red wine vinegar, yuzu marmalade, huckleberry pie and maraschino cherries are now on my to-cook list. These recipes include some of the book's funniest moments, like the ones for ''hiker's toilet paper'' (thimbleberry leaves are giant and fuzzy) and durian lip balm (''Some people will say this lip balm stinks. No kisses for them'').  This is where the fruit we used as a stand-in for depression, motherhood or a bad ex is transformed back into its original, edible self. The ingredients, like words, get thoughtfully measured and weighed and mixed into something delicious and meaningful. Or maybe it's just a pie.  Alex Beggs is the senior staff writer at Bon Appétit. THE BOOK OF DIFFICULT FRUIT Arguments for the Tart, Tender, and Unruly (With Recipes) By Kate Lebo Illustrated. 391 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $28.  Kate Lebo (PHOTOGRAPH BY Melissa Heale  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002v "
255		"    Life Hands You Lemons  By Lauren Christensen  807 words 25 April 2021   13     GOLD DIGGERS  By Sanjena Sathian  In American high schools, it is not uncommon to see stressed-out teenagers pop an Adderall or Ritalin. Maybe they have A.D.H.D., or got the pill from a friend, a dealer, a parent. The goal often being to chase not a high, but the illusion of perfection. To live up to a parent's expectations. To perform.  In Sanjena Sathian's debut novel, ''Gold Diggers,'' the teenage protagonist's drug of choice is not quite F.D.A. approved: It is literal gold, treasures lifted from neighbors and vendors, smelted at home, mixed with sugar and lemons and imbibed as ''lemonade.'' The elixir instills the kind of maniacal focus -- not just on a math test or school debate, but on an entire future -- that is needed to ''make it'' as the child of immigrants in America.  Neeraj, who goes by Neil, lives in the suburb of Hammond Creek, Ga., across the street from his classmate Anita Dayal. Anita's mother, Anjali, is the one person in town who knows how to mix the golden drink, a legacy of her upbringing in Bombay. The year is roughly 2005, and Kanye's ''Gold Digger'' is playing on repeat. In this world populated mostly by ''desis'' (South Asians and their American-born kids), the way to succeed looks, not coincidentally, a lot like the way to succeed in the white world: Go to Harvard.  Some kids play the game dutifully. ''My sister telegraphed her ambitions in the Duke poster on her wall,'' Neil says. But for him, there is no poster. He fears a future limited by his ''absorbed averageness'' -- which, for a brown person, means no future at all. That is, until his first sip of lemonade bonds him to generations of Indian ancestry.  Of the novel's many plotlines, all are secondary to the wrenching, will-they-or-won't-they love story between Neil and Anita. Part 1 bonds them in a verboten drug operation, though Anita's eyes are too set on college, the Miss Teen India pageant, a fratty white boy named Sam, to really see Neil at all. A tragedy divides them further, and their final childhood exchanges, in person and via AIM (''anibun91: and sick of being only / anibun91: like / anibun91: pretty for a brown girl''), are, for all this novel's leaps of imagination, achingly real reminders of what it was like to be an adolescent in post-9/11 America, feeling the weight of your parents' dreams on your shoulders, but mostly just wanting to drink and make out.  The tension Sathian builds is one of teenage insecurity swelling into adulthood, until disillusion overthrows the tyranny of American perfectionism. By Part 2, Neil is a Ph.D. candidate at Berkeley who cares less about his history dissertation than about the semifictional ''Bombayan gold digger,'' a man he conjures, obsessively, as one of the few Hindu émigrés to the California coastline during the gold rush in the mid-1800s.  This intimate glimpse of millennials who are second-generation Americans (''conceptual orphans,'' as Neil calls them) shows how history repeats. It is a story of immigrants reaping their futures from property they have found, which is not theirs -- or is it? It is also a story of westward migration: from India to the United States, from the suburban South to the tech-boom Bay Area. Always, the endpoint is California, ''this endlessly striving state at the end of America, where everyone was always going somewhere, and fast.''  But is this always somewhere we want to be? In Silicon Valley, the Teslas and smart fridges and apps that peddle the promise of immortality are merely the latest iterations of the pure gold that once lured 300,000 men out west, the latest tools this country has used to capitalize on the outsiders' fears that we are not, will never be, enough. Touring yuppie houses in Redwood City, Neil has a panic attack, crouching on the carpeted floor in a pose that's almost prayerlike. ''Everyone's ease was galactically distant,'' Sathian writes, her often exquisite prose humming with contagious anxiety. ''I wanted to disdain this prescribed life and yet I could not help it. ... I wanted what it gave everyone else.''  Of course, a book can be its own manifestation of the American dream. Neil's imagined Bombayan at one point joins a local newspaper, ''for who would suspect a professional writer of English to be an outsider?''  ''Make use of all you took,'' Neil urges his gold digger, as Sathian urges Neil. ''Write yourself into America.''  Lauren Christensen is an editor at the Book Review. GOLD DIGGERS By Sanjena Sathian 344 pp. Penguin Press. $27.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Nishat Akhtar FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0002t "
256		"    Deaths; SPIELVOGEL, CARL  156 words 25 April 2021   31     SPIELVOGEL--Carl. What a great friend and what a great career. We were friends for almost fifty years and enjoyed so many wonderful times together: you, Barbaralee, Dalia, and myself. Dalia and I were proud of the fact that we knew you both before you knew each other. You had one of the most blessed marriages of all time, a truly loving partnership. Carl--you had a fabulous professional career, first at the new_york_times and then building your legendary advertising agency. At the same time, you were seated on the board of my Manhattan Industries company, where you were a wise and stalwart ally and superb director. The whole Leeds Family, especially my daughters Ashley and Tracy, sends their love and sympathy to our beloved Barbaralee, as well as the entire Spielvogel Family. Our lives will never be quite the same without you. Larry Leeds 1/3  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0001i "
257		"    Deaths; SPIELVOGEL, CARL  92 words 25 April 2021   31     SPIELVOGEL--Carl. Deeply saddened by the passing of our beloved uncle, Carl Spielvogel, who enriched our lives for over 45 years. Inspired by his everlasting admiration and love of our dear aunt, Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel. We cherish the many wonderful times shared with our families and our parents, Dede and Fred Rubin, and are grateful for his invaluable wisdom, many kindnesses, exemplary achievements, and commitment to the public good. Carl will live in our hearts forever... Pamela Rubin Carter, Peter Rubin & Tom Rubin 1/3  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0001f "
258		"    Deaths; KEATING, WILLIAM S  143 words 25 April 2021   31     KEATING--William S. William S. Keating died peacefully on April 4, 2021. Born on January 10, 1936 to John and Marguerite Keating, Bill attended Xavier High School, Georgetown University and Columbia Law School. He worked for several decades as Associate General Counsel at the Interpublic Group. A lifetime New Yorker, he loved the opera, travel, bridge and summers in Southampton. His service to the community included sitting on the board of Goodwill Industries and volunteering at Doulas to Accompany and Comfort, the latter of which was the subject of a new_york_times article (nyti.ms/3mCEfq5). He was a devoted friend and family member and will be much missed by all who loved him. He is survived by his brother Joe Keating and his niece and nephews Christine, Ted, and Peter Keating. 1/3  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0000o "
259		"    Deaths; GHAHRAMANI, JULIA ELIZABETH  1,059 words 25 April 2021   31     GHAHRAMANI--Julia Elizabeth. In loving memory of our sweet Julia, who passed away unexpectedly on March 18, 2021 at the age of 26, with a world of hope and possibilities still ahead of her, and a life's worth of accomplishments, love, and joy already behind. Julia Elizabeth Ghahramani was born on May 24, 1994 in New York City's Mt. Sinai Hospital. She grew up in Greenwich, Connecticut, and was the eldest child of Lily Ann Marden and Sassan Ghahramani, and the loving sister of Kimberly Ghahramani and Gregory Ghahramani. In Greenwich, she attended the Parkway Elementary School, Central Middle School, Greenwich High School, Beacon School, and Riverdale Country School in the Bronx. In 2012, Julia moved to her beloved New York City to attend Columbia University. She graduated from Columbia College in 2016 with flying colors, Magna Cum Laude and Phi Beta Kappa, with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Political Science.   Moving from Morningside Heights to the East Village, Julia spent a year after Columbia working as a production assistant at WNBC News 4 New York, where management would have such confidence in her that they would soon send her on interviews despite her lack of any experience in that area. Julia then threw herself into her graduate degree studies at Columbia Law School, where she obtained a Juris Doctor degree in 2020, and was awarded and recognized as a Harlan Fiske Stone Scholar. Julia was also proud to be an active member of and contributor to the prestigious Columbia Law Review, where one of her most cherished moments was a trip to Washington DC to meet with her hero and fellow Law Review alumna, the late Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, before she passed. After the 2018 Marjory Stoneman Douglas school shootings in Florida, Julia helped organize and lead the New York March for Our Lives demonstrations in the spring of 2018 as the movement's deputy director and press liaison, speaking on the steps of City Hall. Driven and always active, Julia also worked while in school at organizations including the International Crisis Group, the NY State Office of the Attorney General, the Center for Popular Democracy, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, and at the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, where she did an externship for the Honorable Robert D. Sack. Julia had only just embarked last year on an exciting new career in the litigation department of the law firm of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, where in a few brief months she touched and made a powerful impression on her colleagues like she would on every person she would meet. Vivacious, fun, full of laughter, joy, and love, and with a mind that was brilliant beyond words, Julia had a heart that was so large and deep with empathy it would always seek to protect the underdog and reach out to those in need. Asa first-year associate, Julia would throw herself into her pro-bono work with refugees, abused women, and prisoners with every inch of her being. For Julia, there was no other way. Julia would always, without fail, make time to reach out to her mom, dad, brother and sister, aunt and uncles, grandmothers, cousins, and friends. She would chat and talk of her life, but the conversation would always turn to how are you doing, because what she was doing was checking in on you, and because she cared so very much. She would engage with strangers and with people of all ages and backgrounds, the bodega and laundromat workers, the neighborhood doormen and waiters, because it was connecting with people that she loved most. And everyone she met would remember Julia. Julia was sweet, brash, and bold. It seems that since the day she was born, Julia would put herself out there, with full gusto and a big smile. Her fifth-grade yearbook read, ""My favorite Parkway memory was in second grade when Mrs. Schutzman's class hatched ducklings. My favorite book is Mortal Engine, a story that takes place 1,000 years in the future. I want to be the president of the United States when I grow up. (Vote for me!)"" As one of her childhood friends laughed, that last line was so Julia, especially the plug for a vote! Julia could speed through hundreds of pages of reading in a matter of a day or two, be it a novel or the most complex academic or legal documents, and amazingly, retain it all. She would seem to effortlessly absorb and analyze current affairs and the news, yet also take enormous pleasure in the softest and smallest things of life. She would regularly beat her dad in Jeopardy, in seemingly every category under the sun, and they would laugh about it as his heart burst with pride. Julia loved music -- she had a strong and beautiful singing voice and for fun taught herself guitar. She loved to socialize, pop culture and silly gossip, museums and art, goofy animal memes, her dog Charlotte and her plants, sushi dinners and parties with friends, and taking in the rhythms of her East Village neighborhood. Beneath it all, Julia felt things personally and deeply, driven by a burning desire to make everything right and this world a better place for all. In her 11th grade yearbook, Julia wrote that her future goal was, ""To change the world, one way or another!"" Dear Julia, you did that from day one, and then so many times over. Julia was the apple of Lily Ann and Sassan's eyes and a shining star to her twin siblings Kimberly and Gregory, to her aunt, uncles, grandmothers, cousins, and to all the friends, family, and strangers she so deeply touched in the brief but brilliant, years she blessed us with her love, joy, wisdom, and laughter. Julia's senior high school yearbook quote was simple, beautiful but unusually simple for a mind that raced at the speed of light. It was not about her, or about the challenges of future life as seen through the eyes of a teen. Rather, she just wrote, ""Thank you Mom, Dad, Kim, and Greg, for everything. Love always, Julia."" Thank you, Julia, for everything. We love you, too, always. Mom, Dad, Kim, and Greg 1/3  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p0000c "
260		"    Deaths; BERNSTEIN, WILLIAM E  881 words 25 April 2021   31     BERNSTEIN-- William E. , MD. September 25, 1934- April 18, 2021 ""Bill"" died peacefully on Sunday, April 18, 2021, at Rose Hospital in Denver, with his beloved wife of 62 years, Paula Phillips Bernstein, Ph.D, holding his hand and his devoted son, Erik, at his side. Bill was a consummate physician, psychiatrist, and psychoanalyst, dedicated to his patients, his colleagues, and to psychoanalytic education. His unique ability to teach, supervise, and nurture is legendary. Students and colleagues are deeply grieving. Each felt specially loved by him. Bill received his medical degree from the University of Minnesota in 1959 and interned at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles. Residency training at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center was interrupted by a two-year tour of duty in the army as a psychiatrist at Tripler Hospital in Honolulu.   He completed residency at UCHSC in 1965 and joined the faculty of the Department of Psychiatry in the Psychiatric Liaison Division, which provides psychiatric consultation to all the medical departments of the Hospital. From 1973-1984 he was Chief of the PLD Division. Simultaneously, he completed psychoanalytic training at the newly formed Denver Institute for Psychoanalysis, graduated in 1976, was appointed immediately to the Institute Faculty and appointed Training and Supervising Analyst in 1986. He left full-time faculty for private practice in 1984, but taught as a Clinical Professor in the Department of Psychiatry until his death. Bill's impact on psychoanalytic education, both in Colorado and nationally was profound. Over the decades he chaired or served on almost every Institute Committee, and as Associate Director of the Institute. In addition, he served on numerous committees of the American Psychoanalytic Association's Board on Professional Standards, including the Committee on Institutes, and as Chair of the Committee on New Training Facilities. He led with wisdom and a steady hand. He was a member of the Center for Advanced Psychoanalytic Studies, Group 8. The friendships with fellow group members were an important part of his life. Bill was born in Albert Lea, MN, on September 25, 1934. His parents, Dr. William C. Bernstein and Mildred G. Bernstein, were living in New Richland, Minnesota, where Bill's father was a country doctor. It was in New Richland that Bill developed an attachment to and respect for the farmers his father served. As a teenager he worked summers on the farm. He loved tractors, trucks and cars. Later, airplanes joined the list of his passions. The family moved to Minneapolis in 1940. When the US entered WWII, his father was designated a major in the Army and sent to Oak Ridge, TN to be a doctor for the scientists in The Manhattan Project, which Bill's elementary school teachers told the kids was ""manufacturing red tape."" It was there that Bill witnessed racism and discrimination up close. Seeing these wrongs formed the basis of his belief in human rights, voting rights, and equal rights for all. The family settled in St. Paul after the war. Bill attended high school at St. Thomas Academy, where he acquired the habit of shining his shoes every day. This lasted his entire life. In 1958, he and Paula were married. Their love was central to his life. He loved to travel, especially to Florence, Italy and New York. As his arthritis became more crippling, Erik made travel possible. Bill loved taking his granddaughters to faraway places and the family times in Aspen. He adored his sister Jenny. He was a constant reader, and re-reader, usually keeping four or more books going at a time. He loved fiction, mysteries, Faulkner, psychoanalytic books and journals, and everything written by his brother-in-law, Greil Marcus. In addition to his wife and son, he is survived by his beloved granddaughters, Sara Rose Bernstein and Sophia Jenelle Bernstein; his sister and brother-in-law, Jenelle and Greil Marcus; three nieces, Lisa Hanauer, the daughter of his sister Paula who died in 1993, Emily Marcus and Cecily Marcus; a nephew-in-law, Steve Perry; and three grandnieces, Gemma Paula Baumer, Pearl Mildred Perry and Rose James Perry. Bill was a quiet man who never demanded center stage. He loved his work as an analyst, professor, mentor, and supervisor of psychoanalytic candidates. He loved his ""Paola"" with all his heart. During the COVID pandemic, they quarantined in their home in Denver for over a year, neither going out, except for medical reasons, nor having people in the house. He spent his last year reading, watching MSNBC and PBS, old movies, and exploring travelogues on YouTube, going places he had never been and returning to his favorites. He never ceased working remotely with students and colleagues. In his last week he taught his last class. He leaves a huge hole, a great feeling of absence, in the lives of those lucky enough to have known him and to have shared his time. The family will hold a private graveside service on Sunday, May 2, 2021 at 11:45am MDT. A public livestream will be available on Feldman Mortuary's YouTube channel. In lieu of flowers, if you wish, please make a gift to the Denver Institute for Psychoanalysis or to a charity of your choice. 1/3  Document NYTF000020210425eh4p00002 "
261		"    Covid-19 Exposure Risk in the United States by County  86 words 24 April 2021   4     About 67 percent of people nationwide live in counties with a very high or extremely high risk of exposure to Covid-19, according to an analysis of coronavirus case and testing data by The new_york_times and public health experts. This map shows the current exposure risk level for each county. For information about every county and a full description of suggested activities at each risk level, go to nytimes.com/covidrisk  Document NYTF000020210426eh4o0000q "
262		"    Officials Suggest Global Image May Be Moderating Force on Taliban  By Michael Crowley  1,623 words 24 April 2021   15     Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken and others say the prospect of recognition -- and financial aid from the United States -- can moderate the militant group. Some call that delusional.  WASHINGTON -- President Biden's plan to withdraw American troops from Afghanistan has drawn sharp criticism that it could allow a takeover by the Taliban, with brutal consequences, particularly for the rights of women and girls.  In response, top Biden administration officials have offered a case for why the outcome may not be so dire: The Taliban, they say, might govern less harshly than feared after taking partial or full power -- in order to win recognition and financial support from world powers.  That argument is among the most significant defenses against those who warn that the Taliban will seize control of Kabul and impose a brutal, premodern version of Islamic law, echoing the harsh rule that ended with the American invasion after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.  Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken made the case on Sunday on ABC's ''This Week,'' saying that the Taliban must gain power through an organized political process and not through force ''if it wants to be internationally recognized, if it doesn't want to be a pariah,'' he said.  On Wednesday, Mr. Blinken announced that the administration would work with Congress to expedite a commitment of $300 million in humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan, pledged last fall under the Trump administration.  ''As the United States begins withdrawing our troops, we will use our civilian and economic assistance to advance a just and durable peace for Afghanistan and a brighter future for the Afghan people,'' Mr. Blinken said in a statement.  In a background briefing for reporters after Mr. Biden's withdrawal announcement last week, a senior administration official said the denial of international legitimacy would be a punishment for any effort to roll back human rights and women's rights in the country.  Other U.S. officials and some prominent experts call this ''pariah'' theory valid, saying Taliban leaders have a record of seeking international credibility, placing a high priority on the removal of sanctions against them. Taliban officials have made clear their desire for foreign aid to rebuild their country after two decades of grinding war.  Some experts also believe that Taliban leaders have moderated in recent years, recognizing that Afghanistan's cities have modernized, and note that the group's peace negotiators have traveled internationally, seeing the outside world in a way its founders rarely, if ever, did.  To critics, however, such notions are tragically deluded, ignoring the Taliban's fundamentalist ethos -- and are thin cover for abandoning the country to a cruel fate.  ''That's a story we tell ourselves to feel better about leaving,'' said Representative Tom Malinowski, Democrat of New Jersey, who served as the State Department's top official for human rights in the Obama administration.  ''There's nothing we have to offer that will cause them to preserve the things they've been fighting to erase,'' added Mr. Malinowski, who opposes Mr. Biden's withdrawal plan.  Given the reality that Mr. Biden is removing all American troops by Sept. 11, diplomatic and financial pressure remain among the few tools the United States can use to constrain the Taliban. For the time being, the United States also will continue to supply military aid to Afghanistan's government in hopes that its security forces will not be overrun.  But in the long term, there is almost no doubt that the Taliban will either become part of the Afghan government or take over the country entirely. How the United States will respond is unclear.  ''Defining what is 'acceptable' for future Taliban influence in Afghanistan will be difficult,'' said Jeffrey W. Eggers, who served as senior director for Afghanistan in the Obama White House and was an adviser to the top commander in the country, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal.  Mr. Eggers said that it would be relatively straightforward to define and enforce expectations around the Taliban's ties to terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda and the Islamic State. But social and human rights will be more challenging, he said.  Barnett Rubin, an expert on Afghanistan who served as senior adviser to President Barack Obama's special representative for the country from 2009 to 2013, is among those who say they are hopeful that the Taliban can be tempered by nonmilitary means.  In a paper published last month by the United States Institute of Peace, before Mr. Biden's announcement, Mr. Rubin contended that America ''has overestimated the role of military pressure or presence and underestimated the leverage that the Taliban's quest for sanctions relief, recognition and international assistance provides.''  Mr. Rubin added that the agreement Taliban leaders signed with the Trump administration in February 2020 committed Washington to beginning the process of removing U.S. and United Nations sanctions on the group, including some that are targeted at its individual leaders. It also featured a guarantee that the United States ''will seek economic cooperation for reconstruction with the new post-settlement Afghan Islamic government.''  Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, lent credence to the idea in February during testimony before Congress after a panel he helped lead, the Afghanistan Study Group, released a report.  ''Sometimes we think we don't have any leverage over the Taliban,'' General Dunford said, saying that the group's desire for sanctions relief, international legitimacy and foreign support may temper its violence.  Vanda Felbab-Brown, the director of the Initiative on Nonstate Armed Actors at the Brookings Institution, agreed that top Taliban leaders placed a high value on relations with the international community, if only to secure development funding.  ''There is a real understanding at the leadership level, not just fake posturing, that they don't want to bankrupt the country to the same extent they did in the 1990s,'' said Ms. Felbab-Brown, who has spoken extensively with Taliban officials and commanders. ''In the 1990s, the bankrupting was not inadvertent -- it was a purposeful policy that sought to address the troubles of Afghanistan by destroying the institutions of the past decades.''  It remains unclear, though, how the Taliban can resolve the contradiction between its doctrinaire positions restricting women's rights and political pluralism with the standards on which any U.S. administration and Congress will condition development aid.  Among other things, Mr. Biden's newly confirmed head of the United States Agency for International Development, Samantha Power, is one of the administration's most prominent human rights advocates.  ''America doesn't shovel out aid unconditionally,'' Mr. Malinowski said. ''Most American aid is designed to help governments do the very things that the Taliban despises.''  The Taliban were presented with such choices when they controlled much of Afghanistan in the 1990s. For several years in a row, the group sent delegations to United Nations headquarters seeking recognition there, to no avail.  A desire for recognition and assistance was not enough, however, to make the group heed the United States' demand that it hand over Qaeda's leader, Osama bin Laden, a stance that ultimately led to Afghanistan's invasion after the Sept. 11 attacks.  ''I think the Afghans deserve more than just being told, well, the Taliban better not do this,'' said Christine Fair, a professor at Georgetown University's Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service and who has studied Afghanistan for years. ''They're really clear that they want to roll back the rights of women. And they don't want to contest elections. They believe that they should be given a piece of the government because they have killing power.''  Ms. Fair added that the Biden administration should be placing more focus on the role of neighboring Pakistan, which has long had great influence over the Taliban.  H.R. McMaster, a retired three-star general who served as national security adviser during the Trump administration, said it was ''delusional'' to believe that the Taliban had fundamentally changed in 20 years, and dismissed the idea that the group was seeking greater international acceptance.  It is false, he said, to think ''there is a bold line between the Taliban and Al Qaeda,'' he said on Monday during a discussion for the Belfer Center at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government in which he roundly criticized Mr. Biden's decision.  ''They have said that their first step is to reestablish the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan,'' he said. If that were to happen, it would be ''a humanitarian catastrophe of a colossal scale.''  Mr. Eggers said that the reality could be more nuanced, and one that could confound American policymakers.  ''For example, what if Afghanistan ends up being about as bad as the Saudis with regard to their treatment of women?'' he said. ''That's not good enough, but what do we do then?''  Mark Mazzetti and Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.  Mark Mazzetti and Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.  American forces in the mountains of eastern Afghanistan in 2013. After troops leave, diplomatic and financial pressure will be among the few tools the U.S. has left. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE new_york_times); Peace negotiators for the Taliban, like the delegation at talks in Russia last month, have seen the outside world in a way that was rare among the group's founders. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUSSIAN FOREIGN AFFAIRS MINISTRY/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK); Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken met with his counterpart in Kabul last week. He said the Taliban would be seen as a pariah if the group took power by force. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AFGHAN PRESIDENTIAL PALACE VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES   Document NYTF000020210426eh4o0000o "
263		"    Pfizer and Moderna Offer Defense Against Variant In New York, Studies Say  By Apoorva Mandavilli  1,087 words 24 April 2021   4     The research adds to a growing number of findings suggesting the Pfizer and Moderna shots are protective against the variants identified so far.  For weeks, New Yorkers have witnessed the alarming rise of a homegrown variant of the coronavirus that has kept the number of cases in the city stubbornly high. City officials have repeatedly warned that the variant may be more contagious and may dodge the immune response.  On that second point, at least, they can now breathe easier: Both the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines will effectively prevent serious illness and death from the variant, two independent studies suggest.  Antibodies stimulated by those vaccines are only slightly less potent at controlling the variant than the original form of the virus, both studies found.  ''We're not seeing big differences,'' said Michel Nussenzweig, an immunologist at Rockefeller University in New York and a member of the team that published one of the studies on Thursday.  The bottom line? ''Get vaccinated,'' he said.  The results are based on laboratory experiments with blood samples from small numbers of vaccinated people and have not yet been peer-reviewed. Still, they are consistent with what is known about similar variants, several experts said, and they add to a growing body of research that suggests that the two main vaccines in the United States are protective against all of the variants identified so far.  ''The take-home message is that the vaccines are going to work against the New York variant and the South African variant and the U.K. variant,'' said Nathan Landau, a virologist at N.Y.U.'s Grossman School of Medicine who led the study.  The vaccines spur the body to mount an expansive immune response, with thousands of types of antibodies and several types of immune cells. One subset of these immune fighters, called neutralizing antibodies, is essential for preventing infection. But even when neutralizing antibodies are in short supply or even absent, the rest of the immune system may marshal enough of a defense to fend off serious illness and death.  In both new studies, neutralizing antibodies from vaccinated people were better at thwarting the virus than those from people who developed antibodies from being sick with Covid-19. Direct comparison of the two sets of antibodies offered a possible explanation: Antibodies from vaccinated people are distributed across a broader range of parts of the virus, so no single mutation has a big impact on their effectiveness -- making vaccines a better bet against variants than immunity from natural infection.  The variant first identified in New York, known to scientists as B.1.526, raced through the city after its initial discovery in November. It accounted for one in four diagnosed cases by November and nearly half of cases as of April 13. The variant that brought Britain to a standstill, B.1.1.7, is also circulating widely in New York. Together, the two add up to more than 70 percent of coronavirus cases in the city.  The worry about the variant identified in New York has centered on one form of it, which contains a mutation that scientists are calling Eek. The Eek mutation subtly alters the shape of the virus, making it difficult for antibodies to target the virus and, as a result, undercutting the vaccines.  In the second study, Dr. Landau's team found that the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are only marginally less protective against the variant that devastated Britain and against forms of the variant discovered in New York that don't contain the Eek mutation.  Several laboratory studies have shown that antibodies induced by the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are slightly less powerful against a third variant, one identified in South Africa, which also contains Eek. Other vaccines fared worse. South Africa suspended use of the AstraZeneca vaccine after clinical trials showed that the vaccine did not prevent mild or moderate illness from the variant that was circulating there.  ''It already started out as a lower level in terms of the immunity that it generated,'' Dr. Nussenzweig said of the AstraZeneca vaccine. Referring to the Pfizer and Moderna shots, he said, ''We're so lucky in this country to have these vaccines compared to the rest of the world.''  Florian Krammer, an immunologist at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai who was not involved in either of the new studies, said he was more concerned about other countries' vaccine programs than about the variants themselves.  ''I am less concerned about variants than I was two months ago,'' he said, but added: ''I'm worried about countries that don't have enough vaccine and that don't have that vaccine rollout. I'm not worried anymore about the U.S., honestly.''  Dr. Landau's team also tested monoclonal antibodies used to treat Covid-19 against the variants. They found that the cocktail of monoclonal antibodies made by Regeneron worked as well against the variant discovered in New York as against the original virus.  The studies are reassuring, but they indicate that the Eek mutation is one to watch, said Jesse Bloom, an evolutionary biologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.  ''This could certainly be a step toward the virus becoming somewhat more resistant to infection- and vaccine-mediated immunity,'' Dr. Bloom said. ''I don't think it's something that people need to immediately become alarmed about, but it definitely impresses us as important.''  Dr. Bloom led the analysis comparing vaccine-induced antibodies with those produced by natural infection. He found that the most powerful antibodies bind to multiple sites in a key part of the virus. Even if a mutation affects the binding in one site in this region, antibodies that target the remaining sites would still be protective.  Antibodies induced by the vaccine cover many more sites across this region than those from natural infection -- and so are less likely to be affected by a mutation in any one site.  The study looked only at antibodies stimulated by the Moderna vaccine, but the results are likely to be the same for the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, he added.  ''This could potentially be a good thing as the virus is creating mutations,'' Dr. Bloom said.  A Moderna shot in the Bronx. A variant first reported in New York accounted for nearly half of the city's cases by April 13. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210425eh4o00044 "
264		"    The Short, Unhappy Life of Europe's Super League  By Andrew Das  1,759 words 24 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     A timeline of the Super League, which was designed to reshape European soccer and instead rained only grief on its 12 clubs in the two days before it imploded.  The 48-hour history of European soccer's long-discussed, hastily arranged, belatedly announced, much-derided and quickly abandoned Super League was short on chapters but long on drama.  The battle for control of soccer's billion-dollar economy -- a fight that Rory Smith of The new_york_times referred to on Friday as The Sunday-Tuesday War -- began with rumors of a blockbuster new league, then burst into the open with talk of lies, deceptions and betrayals; prompted street protests in several countries; and produced threats of official government action and sporting excommunication in many others.  And then it all ended, only two days after the news broke, with a cascade of humbling reversals by half of its member clubs.  If you weren't paying attention, you missed quite a bit. Here's a recap.  The Plan  The idea of a superleague of top European soccer teams had been discussed for decades, but never with the detail and the concrete plans that emerged on Sunday morning.  After months of secret talks, the breakaway teams -- which included some of the biggest, richest and best-known teams in world sports -- confirmed that they were forming a new league, unmoored from soccer's century-old league systems and Continental organizational structure. They declared that the soccer economy no longer worked for them, and that their new project would create a shower of riches that would reach every level of the game.  European officials, national leagues and the clubs left out -- not to mention fans, who smelled greed as the prime motivation -- recoiled.  The league they have agreed to form -- an alliance of top clubs closer in concept to closed leagues like the N.F.L. and the N.B.A. than soccer's current model -- would bring about the most significant restructuring of elite European soccer since the 1950s, and could herald the largest transfer of wealth to a small set of teams in modern sports history.  Read more from Tariq Panja, who broke the news.  High Stakes  Rory Smith noted not only what soccer would lose with the play by the big clubs, but also why fans (and sponsors, and TV broadcasters, and the news media) bore some of the blame for the idea's coming to fruition.  And it is here that those who hope to benefit from shutting the door, from fixing the rules of engagement, cannot take all of the blame. Many of those who spent Sunday spitting fury at the greed of the conspirators have been complicit, over the last 30 years or so, in making this -- or something very much like it -- the only conclusion possible.  That is true of the Premier League, which waved in money from anyone and everyone who could afford to buy a club, which took great pride in its ''ownership neutral'' approach, which never stopped to ask whether any of it was good for the game. It is true of the Spanish authorities, who made it clear that the rules did not really apply to Real Madrid or Barcelona.  It is true, perhaps most of all, of UEFA, which has grown fat and rich on the proceeds of the Champions League, from bowing to the demands of its most powerful constituent clubs, giving more and more power away just to keep the show on the road. It is true, even, of the rest of us in soccer's thrall -- the news media and the commentariat and the fans -- who celebrated the multimillion-dollar transfers and the massive television deals and the conspicuous consumption of money and did not stop to ask where it would all go.  The Fight Begins  By Monday morning, the battle to stop the Super League was on. Governments and heads of state weighed in. So did FIFA, which often views itself as an independent nation. Secret intelligence was shared, frantic phone calls were made, and shouts of ''Judas!'' and other insults, like ''snakes'' and ''liars,'' added to the tension.  By first light, the fight was on. In a letter written by the breakaway teams, they warned soccer's authorities that they had taken legal action to prevent any efforts to block their project.  A few hours later, Aleksander Ceferin, the president of European soccer's governing body, UEFA, used his first public appearance to denounce the group behind the plan and vowed to take stern action if it did not reverse course. He raised the possibility of barring players on the participating teams from events like the World Cup and other tournaments, and threatened to banish the rebel clubs from their domestic leagues. Sunday's announcement, he said, amounted to ''spitting in football fans' faces.''  Wait: What's a Super League?  Still not sure what the Super League even was? We can catch you up really fast right here.  The Tide Turns  With prominent players, respected coaches, everyday fans, and sponsors and television networks adding their voices to the opposition, Gianni Infantino, the president of FIFA, was persuaded to pull out the biggest threat in the arsenal of those fighting for the status quo: In a speech at the congress of European soccer's governing body, he reiterated FIFA's threat to ban any players who took part in an outside competition from the World Cup:  ''If some elect to go their own way then they must live with the consequences of their choice, they are responsible for their choice,'' the FIFA president, Gianni Infantino, said in an address to European soccer leaders at their congress in Montreux, Switzerland. ''Concretely this means, either you are in, or you are out. You cannot be half in and half out. This has to be absolutely clear.''  It All Falls Apart  Tuesday was a blur. First, whispers, then street protests, and then news: Manchester City was out. Chelsea was looking for ways out of its contract. Arsenal, Spurs and Manchester United walked away. Liverpool followed.  Forty-eight hours after it began, it was all over.  The denouement was a stunning implosion for a multibillion-dollar proposal that had prompted howls of outrage from nearly every corner of the sport since it was announced on Sunday, and the culmination of a frantic 48 hours of arguments, threats and intrigue at the highest levels of world soccer.  What Were They Thinking?  How, Rory Smith asked, could the founders have been so blind? How could they not have seen this coming? Where was the people backing this idea? And do we ever have to take their threats seriously again?  By Monday, less than a day into their brave new world, they had lost the governments, and they had lost the European Union. Not long after, they lost the television networks that, ultimately, would have had to pay for the whole thing.  Then they lost the players and the managers, the stars of the show they were hoping to sell around the globe so that they might grow fatter still on the profits: first Ander Herrera and James Milner and Pep Guardiola and Luke Shaw and then, in a matter of hours, dozens more, whole squads of players, breaking cover and coming out in opposition to the plan.  By Tuesday, there was scarcely anyone they had not lost. They had lost Eric Cantona. They had lost the royal family. They had even lost the luxury watchmakers, and without the luxury watchmakers, there was nothing left to lose but themselves.  The Tick Tock  The back story, reported in rich detail by Tariq Panja, was even richer, though. How Barcelona tipped everyone's hand. How Paris St.-Germain and Bayern -- after receiving offers to join -- turned down the league and instead helped to kill it. How an olive branch tucked into a speech in Switzerland gave England's clubs a way out.  The full, definitive story reads like a movie thriller:  Still, the drumbeat of rumors continued, and Ceferin felt he needed to be sure. So as he slid into the front seat of his Audi Q8 on Saturday to start the eight-hour drive from his home in Ljubljana to his office in Switzerland, he decided to get to the bottom of things. He placed a call to Agnelli. His friend did not pick up.  Ceferin -- the godfather to Agnelli's youngest child -- texted the Italian's wife and asked if she might get the Juventus president to call him urgently. He was three hours into his journey when his cellphone rang. Breezily, Agnelli reassured Ceferin, again, that everything was fine.  Ceferin suggested they issue a joint communiqué that would put the issue to rest. Agnelli agreed. Ceferin drafted a statement from the car and sent it to Agnelli. An hour later, Agnelli asked for time to send back an amended version. Hours passed. The men traded more calls. Eventually, the Italian told Ceferin he needed another 30 minutes.  And then Agnelli turned off his phone.  What Now?  By Friday, even the bankers were apologizing. But soccer's problems were not over.  The plan hatched by Europe's elite clubs was wrong on almost every level, but its architects got one thing right: Soccer's economy, as it stands, does not work.  Now it is gone. It is possible that, by the end of this weekend, as either Manchester City or Tottenham celebrates winning the League Cup, as Bayern Munich inches ever closer to yet another Bundesliga title, as Inter Milan closes in on a Serie A crown, all of this will feel like a fever dream. On the surface, it will be behind us. The insurrection will have been defeated, condemned to the past. Everything will be back to normal.  But that is an illusion, because though the Super League never had a chance to play a game -- it barely had time to build out a website -- it may yet prove the catalyst to the salvation of soccer. It has, after all, stripped the elite of their leverage. They played their cards, and the whole thing became a bluff. Now, for the first time in years, power resides in the collective strength of the game's lesser lights.  They will need to use it.  Andrea Agnelli. Few people had a week worse than he did. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Marco Bertorello/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0005a "
265		"    Four Astronauts Head to Space Station  By Kenneth Chang  1,155 words 24 April 2021   3     The first two launches of NASA astronauts by Elon Musk's rocket company, SpaceX, worked like a charm.  The third worked like a charm too -- a string of successes over the past year that is making human spaceflight look routine, as NASA and Mr. Musk's company intend it to.  At 5:49 a.m. Eastern on Friday, a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket carrying a Crew Dragon capsule with four astronauts aboard lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The countdown had proceeded smoothly through the early morning and even ran ahead of schedule at times.  At a news conference after the launch, a sleep-deprived Mr. Musk said that the launching of people on SpaceX rockets remained ''very, very intense.''  He added: ''I suppose it does get a little bit easier. But it's still extremely intense.''  NASA's acting administrator, Steve Jurczyk, said the capability SpaceX had added to NASA would be important for accelerating science research and technology development in space.  ''It really is important for getting a regular cadence of crew to the station and back,'' he said.  The mission, Crew-2, is taking the astronauts -- Shane Kimbrough and Megan McArthur of NASA; Akihiko Hoshide of JAXA, the Japanese space agency; and Thomas Pesquet of the European Space Agency -- to the International Space Station.  As with most SpaceX launches, the booster stage of the Falcon 9 rocket landed safely, on a floating platform in the Atlantic, so it can be launched again.  During their 23-some hours in flight, the astronauts were to change out of their spacesuits, eat a meal or two, rest and provide updates to mission control.  Docking at the space station was scheduled for Saturday morning. It would then take a couple of hours of checking to make sure there are no air leaks before the hatches open and the Crew-2 astronauts disembark.  The four astronauts will be living in orbit for six months, conducting science experiments and maintaining the space station. One large task for the astronauts in the coming months is the installation of new solar arrays on the space station.  Crew-2 is a continuation of a successful effort by NASA to turn over to the private sector the business of taking people to low-Earth orbit.  SpaceX conducted a demonstration mission with two NASA astronauts, Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley, a year ago. The capsule, named Endeavour, and the two men then splashed down in the Atlantic Ocean in August.  In November, SpaceX launched what NASA called the first routine operational mission, Crew-1, four astronauts onboard. Those astronauts, still aboard the station, are scheduled to return to Earth next week.  Today's launch was the second operational mission. The Crew-2 astronauts are traveling in the same Endeavour capsule used for the demonstration last year. The Falcon 9 rocket booster on Friday's launch was also used. It had previously launched the Crew-1 mission.  The trouble-free launch of the Crew-2 mission comes as there is some turbulence about the future of the space station.  In recent days, Russian officials have said they are considering ending their participation with the International Space Station in 2025, which is when operations are currently set to end.  But American officials are looking to extend the station's life to 2028 or maybe 2030. They so far do not seem concerned. The Russian news agency TASS reported that Dmitry Rogozin, the head of the Russian space agency, said that the exit would be gradual.  Russian officials said they would work toward building a new Russian space station, although they did not say how the country's underfunded space program could sustain one. With the Crew Dragon becoming operational, the Russian space program lost one of its main sources of revenue: NASA buying seats on the Soyuz rockets.  NASA is negotiating an agreement with Russia in which NASA astronauts would continue to ride on the Soyuz in exchange for Russian astronauts going to space in SpaceX and Boeing capsules. In that arrangement, no money would be exchanged, but it would help ensure that astronauts would be familiar with all of the equipment.  During the news conference, Mr. Musk was asked about SpaceX's next big project for NASA: building the lander to take astronauts back to the surface of the moon.  Last week, NASA awarded SpaceX a $2.9 billion contract to adapt a giant rocket called Starship that it has been developing for trips to Mars and use it to land on the moon.  ''It's a great honor to be chosen by NASA to return to the moon,'' Mr. Musk said.  He then expressed his hopes for building a permanent base on the moon, and then a city on Mars. Mr. Musk has often asserted that spreading to other worlds would be an insurance policy for the long-term survival of humanity. ''We don't want to be one of those single-planet species,'' he said. Currently, the schedule for the lunar program, Artemis, has astronauts landing on the moon in 2024, a timetable originally set by President Donald J. Trump that is widely regarded as unlikely, especially as Congress has not provided as much money for the development of lunar landers as NASA has requested. The space agency had hoped to award contracts to two companies to develop two different landers.  Mr. Musk noted that he had been ''somewhat optimistic'' about SpaceX schedules in the past. (Development of SpaceX rockets and spacecraft have generally taken about twice as long as Mr. Musk's predictions.) But he then added that Starship could be ready to carry people in a couple of years.  ''Obviously, we need to like not be making craters,'' he said, and laughed. ''Otherwise, it's like, 'Hop in, we're going to Mars -- nope, not quite!'''  SpaceX has been launching a series of prototypes from its site in southern Texas, near Brownsville. It is trying to perfect a technique whereby Starship very gently belly flops, using air resistance as a brake and then tipping upward just before landing. The last four flights have ended in fiery crashes, although one did manage to land in a single piece before exploding a few minutes later.  ''The thing that's really important to revolutionize space is a rapidly reusable rocket,'' he said. ''That is the gateway to the heavens.''  Still, Mr. Musk said, the 2024 target was achievable despite the technical challenges.  ''We're going to build a lot of rockets, and then we're going to probably smash a bunch of them,'' Mr. Musk said. ''But I think it will happen. I think 2024, it seems likely.''  A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket with a Crew Dragon space capsule lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Florida on Friday morning after a smooth countdown. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00058 "
266		"    New Face, Old Tradition  47 words 24 April 2021   15     The first official Supreme Court group picture since Justice Amy Coney Barrett, rear right, joined in 2020. The court has regularly taken such photos since 1867, when it posed for Alexander Gardner.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00059 "
267		"    Why the World Needs U.S. To Lead on Climate Issues  By David Leonhardt  1,737 words 24 April 2021   11     By David Leonhardt  Good morning. If the U.S. leads on climate, will other countries follow?  Leadership matters  When I was last in China, in 2019, I met an entrepreneur named Gao Jifan, who told me a story that I've been reflecting on during President Biden's climate summit this week.  Back in the 1990s, Gao received a letter from an old friend who was living in the United States. The letter included a photo clipped from a newspaper, showing President Bill Clinton as he announced a plan to outfit one million homes with solar power.  ''It was like a light bulb,'' Gao recalled, as we were sitting in his office in Changzhou, about 100 miles northwest of Shanghai. Clinton's initiative caused Gao -- a chemist by training -- to think that he should start a company to meet the coming demand for solar equipment. That company, Trina Solar, has since made Gao a billionaire.  For the inspiration, Gao is grateful to the U.S. But he is also befuddled by the American approach to climate change.  ''There is really conflicting policy,'' he said. He rattled off the names of recent presidents -- Clinton, Bush, Obama, Trump -- and moved his hand back and forth, to describe the sharp policy changes from one to the next. Those changes, he added, had hurt the solar industry and other clean-energy efforts: If the U.S. took a more consistent approach, the global struggle to slow climate change would be easier.  A 'lost four years'  Many Americans have come to believe a different story -- namely, that U.S. climate policy hardly matters compared with the actions of China, India and other countries that account for a growing share of emissions. As some congressional Republicans have been asking this week, why should the U.S. act to slow climate change unless other countries do so first?  But that view is not consistent with history, either the recent history of climate diplomacy or the broader history of American influence.  ''There aren't many other areas of policy where we say, 'Why don't we let everyone else lead, and we'll follow?''' as Nathaniel Keohane of the Environmental Defense Fund says. The U.S., for all its problems, remains the world's most powerful country. When it wants to influence the policies of other countries, it can often do so, especially when those countries see it as being in their own interests to change.  Climate is just such an issue. Leaders of many other countries understand that climate change and extreme weather can cause problems for them. The leaders also see clean energy as a growing industry and want their companies to be leaders.  The U.S. can't simply dictate terms. Both China and India, for example, will remain more reliant on coal than Biden administration officials wish. But the U.S. can often have an effect. Relative to many other issues, in fact, climate diplomacy is sometimes easier: President Xi Jinping has largely rejected U.S. entreaties on Hong Kong, Xinjiang and the South China Sea, but he has been willing to deal on climate change.  President Barack Obama and Xi came to multiple agreements that involved both countries moving to reduce emissions. They started small, with the relatively narrow topic of refrigerants, and expanded from there. As my colleague Brad Plumer says, ''There's a reasonable argument the Obama administration's and China's joint agreement on climate change in 2014 helped set the table for the Paris climate agreement.''  Crucial to these efforts was a U.S. willingness to act at home: It's much easier to agree to take economic risks when your main global competitor is doing the same. And the U.S. still leads the world in per-person emissions, about 75 percent above China, according to recent numbers.  The Trump administration slowed global efforts on climate change by dismissing it as a threat and allowing more pollution at home. A Chinese official last week mocked the U.S. for ''the lost four years.'' The Biden administration is now trying to reverse course, with an emissions-reduction goal that's larger than many advocates expected.  The cynical view -- that the U.S. can only follow, not lead, on climate policy -- has it backward. As Gao told me, one of the biggest obstacles to progress on climate change has been the lack of consistent American leadership.  More on the climate:  â  Biden, addressing world leaders at the start of the summit, said the planet was at ''a moment of peril, but also a moment of extraordinary possibilities.''  â  How a working-class girl from the Boston area became Biden's senior climate adviser: a profile of Gina McCarthy.  â  ''Rising temperatures are likely to reduce global wealth significantly by 2050, as crop yields fall, disease spreads and rising seas consume coastal cities,'' Christopher Flavelle writes.  â  And here's an illustrated guide to climate change for children, by Julia Rosen and Yuliya Parshina-Kottas.  THE LATEST NEWS  The Virus  â  U.S. officials are leaning toward resuming use of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine after finding few new cases of rare blood clots.  â  The Pfizer and Moderna shots appear to work against the variants found in New York, Britain and South Africa.  â  Women in the U.S. are getting vaccinated at a higher rate than men.  â  Covid patients who weren't hospitalized had an increased risk of death months later, a study found.  â  Virus resources: Track cases in every state, with these maps.  Politics  â  The Senate passed a bill to help law enforcement agencies review hate crimes against Asian-Americans.  â  Biden wants to raise taxes on the rich and on capital gains to expand child care and education.  â  Republican senators outlined an infrastructure plan about one-quarter the size of Biden's. It's a starting point for negotiations.  â  The House voted along party lines to grant statehood to Washington, D.C., a Democratic priority that faces obstacles in the Senate.  Policing  â  The shooting of Ma'Khia Bryant, 16, this week was the fourth police killing in Columbus, Ohio, in four months.  â  Democratic candidates for New York City mayor have called for reforming the N.Y.P.D. Here are their plans.  Other Big Stories  â  Russia ordered some of its troops back from the border with Ukraine, easing fears that a war could be looming in Europe.  â  A man who detonated a pipe bomb in a subway tunnel near Times Square in 2017 was sentenced to life in prison.  â  SpaceX launched four astronauts to the International Space Station this morning. (This is what they'll eat in orbit.)  â  A woman lost a $10,000 flute in 2012. She just got it back.  Opinions  â  The pandemic shrank our social circles. That's OK, Kate Murphy writes.  â  David Brooks, Michelle Goldberg and Paul Krugman have columns.  Morning Reads  Threats and secret meetings: How did a European soccer superleague fall apart?  Modern Love: Her mind could rationalize polyamory, but her heart rebelled.  Lives Lived: Gregory Edward Jacobs, known as Shock G, was the frontman of Digital Underground, a hip-hop group that had a string of hits in the early 1990s and introduced its audience to Tupac Shakur. Shock G died at 57.  ARTS AND IDEAS  It's Oscars time  After an awards season of largely virtual events, the Academy Awards are returning this Sunday, with a red carpet and an in-person ceremony. Here's what to watch for:  â  More diversity. This year's Oscar nominations are the most diverse ever, with 70 women nominated across 23 categories, and nearly half of the acting nominations going to people of color.  â  A historic Best Director? ChloÃ© Zhao -- the front-runner, who directed ''Nomadland'' -- would be the first woman of color to win, as well as the second woman ever. (The first was Kathryn Bigelow for ''The Hurt Locker'' in 2010.)  â  A posthumous honor? Chadwick Boseman, who died last year, is up for Best Actor for ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom.'' In a prediction roundup, The Times's Kyle Buchanan writes: ''It's hard to imagine voters won't seize their only opportunity to give one to Boseman for a flashy role that showcased the late actor's immense range.''  â  A close race for Best Actress. Viola Davis (''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom''), Frances McDormand (''Nomadland'') and Carey Mulligan (''Promising Young Woman'') are top contenders.  Watch some of the nominated films using this streaming guide. And test your knowledge of Oscars trivia or fill out a 2021 ballot.  PLAY, WATCH, EAT  What to Cook  These spicy won tons come close to what you'd find at Cantonese restaurants.  A Good Read  The British singer Marianne Faithfull has had several brushes with death in her 74 years. She opened up about her life and her coming album.  What to Watch  This month's streaming gems include ''Skate Kitchen,'' a coming-of-age story about female skateboarders, and the thriller ''The Wailing.''  Late Night  The hosts celebrated Earth Day.  Take the News Quiz  Take this week's News Quiz -- with new graphics! -- and compete with other Times readers.  Now Time to Play  The pangram from yesterday's Spelling Bee was potbelly. Here is today's puzzle -- or you can play online.  Here's today's Mini Crossword, and a clue: Become clogged (five letters).  If you're in the mood to play more, find all our games here.  ______  Thanks for spending part of your morning with The Times. See you Monday. -- David  P.S. The first U.S. ship passed through the Suez Canal 64 years ago tomorrow. The passage of the 9,000-ton vessel, named the President Jackson, ''created no stir,'' The Times reported.  You can see today's print front page here.  Today's episode of ''The Daily'' is about the Super League. On ''The Ezra Klein Show,'' Noam Chomsky discusses his worldview.  Claire Moses, Ian Prasad Philbrick, Tom Wright-Piersanti and Sanam Yar contributed to The Morning. You can reach the team at themorning@nytimes.com .  Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox .  A commuter train leaving a 'green station' in Shanghai. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX PLAVEVSKI/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00057 "
268		"    New York City Jail Records Show Guards' Brutality and Cover-Ups  By Jan Ransom  1,926 words 24 April 2021   1     More than half of the roughly 270 correction officers disciplined over a 20-month period lied to investigators or filed incomplete or inaccurate reports.  One New York City Correction officer struck a jailed person in the face for no legitimate reason. Another put a detainee in a banned chokehold several times. A third failed to stop subordinates from using unnecessary force, according to newly released discipline records.  But what was equally notable was what happened after the encounters: In each case, the guards lied or provided inaccurate information about what had occurred.  In fact, more than half of the officers in New York City's jail system who were disciplined over a 20-month period gave false, misleading or incomplete accounts on official forms or in statements to investigators, according to a new_york_times analysis of records recently made public after a long court battle.  The data suggests pervasive attempts by guards to cover up uses of force or other infractions at a time when the city has tried to rein in violence in the jails.  Councilman Keith Powers, a Manhattan Democrat who heads the criminal justice committee, said the data ''highlights how broken this process is and a need to make real efforts to reform it.''  ''It's a turning point to providing more visibility to an often invisible criminal justice system,'' he said.  The city jail system, including the notorious Rikers Island complex, has long been a source of complaints of brutality by guards. Six years ago, when the city entered a landmark legal settlement with federal prosecutors, a key part of the plan was to hold officers accountable for misconduct in a timely way, including a more transparent accounting of episodes involving force.  ''The entire system of use-of-force reporting depends upon officers giving accurate facts and telling the truth about what happened,'' said Mary Lynne Werlwas, director of the Legal Aid Society's Prisoners' Rights Project. Unless there is video evidence, Ms. Werlwas added, ''the officer's word gets credited when it is an incarcerated person's word against an officer's.''  Until now, the disciplinary records of correction officers and their supervisors had been largely kept secret by state law.  That changed last summer when, in response to pressure from protests against police violence and racism after the killing of George Floyd, New York legislators repealed 50-a, the section of the state civil rights statute that shielded most law enforcement misconduct records from the public.  The unions representing police and correction officers and their supervisors quickly filed a lawsuit in federal court to stop the release of the disciplinary records, but a federal judge and an appeals panel eventually rejected their arguments, including the contention that releasing the records could endanger officers. The city released a database detailing disciplinary actions against correction officers in March.  Taken together, the revelations contained in the database paint a picture of ongoing violence by guards in the troubled city jail system, confirming the findings of a federal monitor last fall.  Lying on official forms or to investigators was a common thread. About 56 percent of the more than 270 correction officers who were disciplined from January 2019 to August 2020, including a dozen supervisors, lied, misled investigators or filed incomplete or inaccurate reports, the records show. At least 17 officers made false statements in interviews with officials who were looking into allegations.  The data released by the department did not specify how the officers were found to have provided false information, but typically investigators compare officers' statements with other evidence, such as video footage and medical records documenting injuries.  One officer, Lawrence Wallace, a 15-year veteran of the department, was disciplined eight times in less than two years for using excessive force on people held in city jails, including deploying banned restraints and pepper spray. In four of those cases, he lied on official reports about what had happened, and at least once he made false statements to investigators, the records show.  Correction officials allowed Mr. Wallace to keep his job but docked him 55 vacation days and placed him on probation for two years, a decision the department called a ''holistic approach.'' Reached by telephone, Mr. Wallace declined to comment.  ''I don't know any workplace where five, six, seven violations of major abuses would not result in very serious punishment, if not loss of employment,'' said Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.  Joseph Russo, president of the union representing deputy wardens and assistant deputy wardens, acknowledged that jail staff members sometimes make misleading statements, but he said he thought some were honest mistakes. He argued that officers and supervisors simply do not remember certain interactions, or their memories are spotty because of the stress surrounding the events.  ''To recall these details in great detail is very difficult,'' Mr. Russo said.  Benny Boscio Jr., president of the Correction Officers' Benevolent Association, said in a statement that the majority of the system's 9,400 officers did not have ''a single disciplinary charge.''  City correction department officials also said the reporting errors were not always intentional. To cut down on lapses, the department created a new course for officers to improve their writing skills and to teach them how to complete official incident reports, officials said. The department has also provided counseling and retraining for officers.  Some gaps in reporting, however, are purposeful cover-ups, correction officers said privately, speaking on the condition of anonymity to protect their employment. One said he had witnessed colleagues use excessive force and omit their actions from official records -- for instance, twisting a man's limb after he stopped resisting, or using pepper spray for longer than allowed.  Another staff member said he had seen officers huddle on Rikers Island to decide what statements to make on official forms. He said a captain once also asked him to change the time of an incident on a report to hide when it took place.  The data offered the most complete portrait to date of staff discipline in the city's lockups, but the records were still very limited. They identified the officers only by last name, with a brief description of the offense and the outcome.  The records did not include unsubstantiated allegations or cases in which the accused officer was cleared of wrongdoing. Nor did they contain at least five guards who were fired in the past two years. Three of those officers had been criminally charged with beating incarcerated people and then covering up the assaults, according to the Bronx district attorney's office. Another had been arrested in Queens on a drunk-driving charge.  The data also did not include officers disciplined for drug smuggling or sex crimes. Drug smuggling allegations are generally referred to local prosecutors, officials said, and there were no substantiated rape allegations during the 20-month period in question.  Still, the records showed that, in general, most guards who were brought up on departmental charges of using excessive force escaped serious punishment.  Nine of the more than 270 guards resigned or retired under pressure, the data showed. Twenty-four officers were suspended, and 17 additional officers were placed on probation, which lasted from one to four years. (Some of the suspended officers were also put on probation.) Most of the rest lost vacation days.  Six of the nine officers who resigned or retired had lied or filed incomplete reports about an inappropriate use of force, the records show. ''We do not tolerate false reporting, or excessive or unnecessary uses of force under any circumstances,'' said Jason Kersten, a spokesman for the Department of Correction.  Of the 11 officers in the data with at least three disciplinary charges for misconduct, only one was suspended. None were dismissed.  The suspended officer, Captain Quincy Oudkerk, was found, among other things, to have kicked an inmate who did not pose a threat and then to have lied about the force he used, records showed. He was suspended for 28 days. Mr. Oudkerk declined to comment when reached by phone.  While the database provided just bare-bones description of each incident, more detailed allegations have emerged in lawsuits filed against Mr. Wallace.  In a 2015 suit, Arthur Ceasar said Mr. Wallace had thrown a pair of shoes at him and pummeled him in a cell at the Manhattan Detention Center, sending him to the hospital.  That same year, Mr. Wallace and several other guards were accused in a second lawsuit of beating another person in jail, Basheer Bajas, so badly that he had internal bleeding in his left eye and severe headaches.  In January 2016, Shymell Ephron said in a third lawsuit that Mr. Wallace had punched him repeatedly in the head while he was being detained. The city settled with Mr. Ephron for $3,000.  The same year, Tobias Anderson, who is also listed in court records as Olivia Anderson, said in a fourth lawsuit that Mr. Wallace called him a homophobic slur and purposely dropped him down a flight of stairs in a transgender housing unit.  Asked why Mr. Wallace was still employed by the department despite being disciplined eight times in connection with seven encounters, the correction department said in a statement that officials had considered ''the totality of the circumstances.'' Penalties are not determined by the number of violations a correction officer has pending, the department said.  Mr. Wallace racked up another seven charges while he was waiting for the first allegation against him in 2016 to be resolved, the records showed. Such delays are not unusual. Roughly 46 percent of the cases took two years or more to resolve, the data showed.  In one extreme case, it took officials just over six years to discipline one guard, Carlos Rodriguez, who failed to notify a supervisor about using force on an inmate and later falsified a report in March 2014.  A correction department spokesman, Patrick Rocchio, said the department's disciplinary process was often slowed down because outside agencies, like the city Department of Investigation or state and federal prosecutors, were also investigating.  At least three other officers besides Mr. Wallace were disciplined multiple times, the city data showed. Patrick Alicea, a 10-year veteran, was found to have used excessive force five times over a nine-month period and to have twice provided false statements on official forms. He was demoted from captain to officer.  Two other officers, Maximo Matos and Brian Saryian, who have both been on the force for eight years, were each disciplined on four separate occasions for using improper force, the data showed. Both officers also falsified official statements. Mr. Matos forfeited 60 days of vacation, Mr. Saryian, 55.  Mr. Saryian declined to comment when reached by phone. Mr. Alicea did not respond to requests for comment and Mr. Matos could not be reached.  Adam Playford contributed data analysis.  A new_york_times analysis of jail system records showed that most guards in New York City who were brought up on departmental charges for using excessive force escaped serious punishment. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE new_york_times); A housing unit on Rikers Island, part of a complex of detention centers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE new_york_times); Protesters gathered at City Hall in 2019 as the City Council voted on a plan to close the jail facilities on Rikers Island. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSHUA BRIGHT FOR THE new_york_times) (A17)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00054 "
269		"    Teenage Rookie Makes It Look Easy As He Figures It Out  By Scott Cacciola  1,410 words 24 April 2021   7     The Minnesota Timberwolves are not good this season. But Edwards, their rookie No. 1 draft pick? He is giving fans many reasons to watch (and listen).  As a senior at Holy Spirit Preparatory School in Atlanta, Anthony Edwards commuted about an hour each way from his home in the southern reaches of the city. In addition to the geographical distance, the challenge was that he had no reliable mode of transportation. So he would lean on friends, family members, neighbors and coaches to ferry him back and forth. They wanted to help.  ''People just enjoyed being around him,'' said Tysor Anderson, Edwards's coach at Holy Spirit, who was among those who gave him occasional rides.  Anderson, though, was more impressed that Edwards somehow made it work -- that he was resourceful enough to find his way to school each morning. ''He figured it out,'' Anderson said.  Edwards's ability to figure things out is a skill that he has been working to apply this season as a first-year shooting guard for the Minnesota Timberwolves, a longtime fixer-upper franchise. As the top overall pick in last year's N.B.A. draft, Edwards, 19, has been the center of attention for a struggling team, offering the Timberwolves' fans some hope for the future.  Glimpses of that future have come in the form of a 42-point performance against the Phoenix Suns and highlight-reel plays, including a dunk against the Toronto Raptors that was so explosive Edwards immediately peered toward the Jumbotron above center court so that he could watch a replay.  ''I was like, 'Damn, that's crazy,''' he said.  Edwards, who appears to be 6 feet 4 inches and 225 pounds of tightly coiled springs, is averaging 18.3 points and 4.3 rebounds for the Timberwolves, who are 16-44 ahead of their game against the Utah Jazz on Saturday night.  Edwards has already revealed himself to be one of the league's more engaging personalities, a player who has managed to elevate humdrum, pandemic-era video conference calls to high art. There was an interaction with an Irish reporter that went viral after his accent drew admiration from Edwards -- ''I want to learn how to talk like that,'' he said -- and, more recently, the rookie's introduction to Alex Rodriguez, who is nearing a deal to become one of the Timberwolves' new owners.  ''I don't know who that is,'' Edwards said in a call with reporters this month.  Edwards has since familiarized himself with Rodriguez's body of work (he used to play baseball), and they even had an exchange on social media.  ''He was like: 'What's up, Anthony? I'm Alex,''' Edwards said. ''And I was like, 'What's good?'''  There are also moments when Edwards sounds like the most confident person on the planet. He is convinced, for example, that he could have played professional baseball. Or football, for that matter. (Once upon a time, he said, he was the best 10-year-old running back ''in the world.'') Mere months into his career in amateur table tennis, he considers himself the best player on the Timberwolves. He would like to get involved in the rap game -- as a producer and a performer, because why not?  ''I love music,'' he said with a disarming smile.  In a way, Edwards seems unaffected by the pressure that comes with being a top pick who will go a long way toward dictating the future of an N.B.A. franchise. And those who know him best say that his temperament makes him uniquely equipped for the role.  ''I've always been struck by how effortlessly himself he is,'' said Anderson, now an assistant coach at Jacksonville State. ''He laughs. He talks. If he has questions, he asks. If he has an opinion, he opines. And if he doesn't know about something, he won't pretend that he does.''  It has not been an easy season for N.B.A. rookies. Summer league was canceled because of the pandemic, and training camp was abridged. Now the schedule of games is compressed. Timberwolves Coach Chris Finch, who replaced Ryan Saunders on Feb. 22, said that he had been able to organize about a half-dozen practices since he took over and that half of those had been walk-throughs without much on-court activity.  In other words, Edwards is learning on the fly against a buffet of far more experienced opponents. Finch, though, has found him to be highly coachable -- perhaps too coachable at times.  A few weeks ago, Finch stressed to his players that he wanted them to ''play through'' Karl-Anthony Towns, the team's starting center and another former No. 1 overall pick. Edwards took the message to heart.  ''He kind of went through this period where he wasn't aggressive at all because he was just trying to get the ball to KAT all the time,'' Finch said, referring to Towns by his nickname.  Edwards, though, is still a teenager who is not all that far removed from Holy Spirit, where he established himself as a star. Shortly after Anderson was hired by the school in 2018, Edwards attended the Pangos All-American Camp in California and made an impression.  ''Just destroyed everybody,'' Anderson said.  Edwards was soon on his way to another elite summer showcase, the National Basketball Players Association's Top 100 Camp, and Anderson knew he had to be there -- if only so he could actually meet Edwards. He wanted to make sure that Edwards did not transfer to another high school before the start of his junior season. But the camp was a tough ticket. Anderson called his grandfather, the longtime college coach Lefty Driesell, who had connections.  ''Granddad,'' Anderson recalled telling him, ''I don't ask you for much, but I've got to get in the building.''  Driesell delivered, and Anderson took Edwards to dinner, where they bonded over a conversation about the video game Fortnite. Anderson soon learned more about Edwards and the hardships he had experienced. When Edwards was 14, his mother, Yvette, and his grandmother Shirley both died of cancer. They were enormous figures in his life.  ''They made me happy,'' Edwards said. ''So I just try to stay happy.''  Edwards wound up staying at Holy Spirit, but only for a season. He was so dominant that he reclassified as a senior so that he could graduate early and enroll at Georgia.  ''You didn't have to be a genius to watch one of his games and figure out that this guy didn't need any more high school basketball,'' Anderson said. ''He barely needed college basketball.''  With the Timberwolves, Edwards has discovered that each game presents a fresh challenge. The N.B.A. is not the N.C.A.A.'s Southeastern Conference.  ''Everybody on the court is good,'' he said. ''That's the difference. Everybody can go.''  After Finch got the job, he talked to Edwards about eliminating some of the low-percentage shots cluttering his games -- the midrange pull-ups and the 3-pointers that he was launching off the dribble. Finch wanted him to get to the rim, seek contact and attempt more catch-and-shoot 3-pointers, because he was already making a solid percentage of those.  ''We wanted him to be more efficient,'' Finch said. ''So much about being a good shooter is getting rid of the bad shots.''  Edwards feels more comfortable now than he did through the first few months of the season, when rookies ''don't know anything,'' he said, and his production reflects it. Since the N.B.A. All-Star break in March, Edwards has averaged 23.3 points while shooting 43.5 percent from the field and 34.5 percent from 3-point range -- solid numbers that reflect improvement over the season and still show room for development.  For his part, Edwards said he did not have specific goals other than to ''be the best version of myself.'' And what does that look like? ''I don't know,'' he said. ''I'm just 19.''  Anthony Edwards, the Timberwolves shooting guard, dunking over Tyrese Haliburton of the Kings, top. The dynamic rookie is offering Minnesota fans some hope for the future. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RANDALL BENTON/ASSOCIATED PRESS; CARLOS GONZALEZ/STAR TRIBUNE, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00053 "
270		"    The News Quiz  492 words 24 April 2021   2     1. From 2013 through 2020, police officers in the United States killed an average of about three Americans each day. Since George Floyd's death last May -- and the increased attention on policing -- what has happened to the average number of daily deaths caused by police?  a. Risen significantly  b. Remained stable  c. Fallen significantly  2. This week, NASA achieved a notable first in space. What was it?  a. Astronauts on the International Space Station conducted the first ''free float,'' drifting through space without a tether.  b. Ingenuity, a robotic helicopter on Mars, performed the first flight on another planet.  c. The Hubble telescope spotted the first known ''white hole,'' the other end of a black hole.  d. The Voyager II satellite detected the first music-like sounds from another solar system.  3. Which politician recently wrote a note to his former staff members that began with ''Well, my time has come''?  a. Bob Dole  b. George W. Bush  c. Jimmy Carter  d. Mike Pence  e. Walter Mondale  4. A recent poll found that 45 percent of voters in Texas said they would support a certain celebrity in a run for governor. Who was it?  a. Matthew McConaughey  b. Megan Thee Stallion  c. Owen Wilson  d. Patrick Mahomes  e. Selena Gomez  5. This week, a major initiative was unveiled and fell apart in the span of a few days. What was it?  a. ABC's plan to show live Facebook comments on the Oscars telecast  b. Amazon offering free delivery on all items around the world  c. A summit between South and North Korea to restart peace talks  d. The Biden administration's plan to cut carbon emissions in half by 2030  e. The creation of a European Super League with elite soccer teams  6. In the photo above, children played in Byzantine ruins they now call home. They are among hundreds of refugees who in recent years have settled in ancient archaeological sites, forced from their homes by an ongoing civil war in which country?  a. Cambodia  b. Greece  c. Iran  d. Peru  e. Syria  7. About 31 percent of adults in the United States have now been fully vaccinated, but in hundreds of counties around the country, vaccination rates are low. According to a new_york_times analysis, how does this disparity in vaccination rates mainly break down?  a. By a county's infection and death rate  b. By income  c. By politics  d. By population density  e. By race and age demographics  8. Ninety-five years ago this week, The Times called this newborn ''a possible, though improbable, successor to the throne of England.'' Who was it?  a. David Attenborough  b. Grace Kelly  c. Margaret Thatcher  d. Prince Philip  e. Queen Elizabeth II  Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004u "
271		"    Shock G, 57, 'Humpty Dance' Rapper Who Led Digital Underground, Dies  By Azi Paybarah  1,061 words 24 April 2021   11     The group had a string of hits in the 1990s, including ''The Humpty Dance,'' and helped introduce a little-known rapper named Tupac Shakur.  Gregory Edward Jacobs, known as Shock G, the frontman for the influential hip-hop group Digital Underground, was found dead on Thursday at a hotel in Tampa, Fla. He was 57.  His death was confirmed by the Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office, which did not provide a cause.  Digital Underground had a string of hits in the early 1990s and introduced its audience to a little-known rapper named Tupac Shakur. ''Digital Underground is where Parliament left off,'' Shock G said at the time, referring to George Clinton's groundbreaking funk band.  The group had a sound that ''straddles the line between reality and fantasy, between silliness and social commentary,'' to go with a name that sounded like ''a band of outlaws from a cyberpunk novel,'' The new_york_times wrote in 1991.  Shock G had been shuttling from his home in Tampa to Northern California in 1987 when the group made a self-released single, ''Underwater Rimes.'' That helped get the attention of Tommy Boy Records, which released Digital Underground's first album, ''Sex Packets.'' It was certified platinum for sales of a million copies and featured the hit single ''The Humpty Dance.''  The album stood out for melding funk and jazz riffs on top of catchy drumbeats. And with Shock G's lanky frame and toothy grin, the group had a visual aesthetic ripe for the dawn of the music video generation. Shock G, who was a producer as well as a rapper, was known for spinning different personas, depending on his surroundings.  In the video for ''The Humpty Dance,'' he took on the persona of Humpty Hump, the title character, donning a pair of dark-rimmed glasses with an obviously fake nose, a fur hat and a tie. ''I'm sick wit dis, straight gangsta mack/But sometimes I get ridiculous,'' he raps. ''I'll eat up all your crackers and your licorice/Hey yo fat girl, come here -- are ya ticklish?'' Part of the hook for the song: ''Do the Humpty Hump, come on and do the Humpty Hump.''  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Shock G can be seen in a similar outfit, both goofy and suave, in the video for the group's song ''Doowutchyalike,'' where he encouraged listeners to let loose and enjoy themselves as a saxophone gently riffs over the beat.  Shock G's most lasting impact on hip-hop may have come when Digital Underground released the hit ''Same Song,'' which was Mr. Shakur's breakout appearance on record. Shock G, who is heard first, once again cast himself as the good-time host: ''I came for the party to get naughty, get my rocks on/Eat popcorn, watch you move your body to the pop song.''  When it was Mr. Shakur's turn, he quickly unleashed a thoughtful verse about the dangers of success: ''Get some fame, people change.''  Mr. Shakur had auditioned for Shock G and was hired to be a member of the group's road crew. He eventually performed and recorded with Digital Underground, appearing on the group's ''This Is an EP Release'' (Tommy Boy) and ''Sons of the P'' (Tommy Boy), which was nominated for a Grammy Award.  In 1991, Mr. Shakur started a solo recording career with the album ''2Pacalypse Now'' (Interscope), which sold half a million copies. It included two modest hits, ''Trapped'' and ''Brenda's Got a Baby,'' a song about an unwed teenage mother's plight. Before the album was released, he also started a career as a movie actor, playing the violent, unpredictable Bishop in the Ernest Dickerson film ''Juice.''  By 1993, Mr. Shakur was a rising star. Shock G and another Digital Underground member, Money B, appeared on Mr. Shakur's album, helping create his first major hit, ''I Get Around,'' a poolside anthem with a laid-back beat. But now it was Shock G, sporting an Afro and oversized purple T-shirt, with the message: ''Now you can tell from my everyday fits I ain't rich/So cease and desist with them tricks/I'm just another Black man caught up in the mix/Tryna make a dollar out of 15 cents.''  Shock G was born in Brooklyn on Aug. 25, 1963, and his musical instincts were forged by a childhood spent moving around the country. His mother, Shirley Kraft, was a television producer; his father, Edward Racker, worked as an executive in computer management. After the couple divorced, ''I spent my biggest chunk of time in Tampa but I also lived in New York, Philly and California,'' Shock G had told The Times. ''I have always been into music and played in bands starting when I was 10 or 11.''  His grandmother, Gloria Ali, was a pianist and cabaret singer in Harlem in the 1950s. She taught him how to play Thelonious Monk's '''Round Midnight'' on the piano. Then, as hip-hop began to gain traction in New York in the late 1970s, Shock G, who was living there at the time, recalled, ''All of my friends and I sold our instruments to buy mixers and turntables.''  Shock G is survived by his parents; his sister, Elizabeth Racker; and his brother, Kent Racker.  Shock G saw music as expansive, inclusive and experimental. ''Funk can be rock, funk can be jazz and funk can be soul,'' he told The Times. ''Most people have a checklist of what makes a good pop song: it has to be three minutes long, it must have a repeatable chorus and it must have a catchy hook. That's what makes music stale. We say 'Do what feels good.' If you like it for three minutes, then you'll love it for 30.''  Christina Morales and Jesus Jiménez contributed reporting.  Christina Morales and Jesus Jiménez contributed reporting.  Shock G performing with Digital Underground in Los Angeles in 2011 as his alter ego Humpty Hump. The group's first album, ''Sex Packets,'' stood out for melding funk and jazz riffs on top of catchy drumbeats. It sold a million copies and featured the hit single ''The Humpty Dance.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY EARL GIBSON III/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004t "
272		"   WEALTH MATTERS  Families Investing in Other Families  By Paul Sullivan  1,259 words 24 April 2021   6     For the wealthy, an investment that gets around funds' high fees and may earn good returns. And for the companies, a needed infusion of cash when other options have disappeared.  Charles Widger, 76, sold his investment firm, Brinker Capital, shortly after the pandemic took hold. After decades of building the firm, Mr. Widger, whose name adorns Villanova University's law school, ended up with several hundred million dollars.  But as he watched the economy come to a near stop and then haltingly reopen, he noticed previously healthy family businesses struggling to continue. He worried that many of these companies would not make it through the pandemic.  So, Mr. Widger said, he decided to invest in a new fund, Family Legacy Capital, which makes loans to struggling family-run businesses. ''I can relate to what these people are going through,'' he said. ''I understand the challenges. I wasn't a big conglomerate.''  The way he sees it, family businesses get needed help, and ''there's an opportunity for discerning investors to help these family businesses and get a good return.''  Wealthy families were interested in deals with other families before the pandemic set in. Many wealthy families had a lot of money to invest but weren't interested in traditional investments or funds that charged high fees. They also understood firsthand how family businesses work and how family dynamics can influence them, for good or bad.  They had a range of investments to choose from: buying a stake in a family business; buying another family's business outright; or banding together with other wealthy families to invest in a business, with a knowledgeable family taking the lead and all families bypassing funds' management fees.  For some of the family businesses in need, assistance from the wealthy has often been their last hope. ''Banks are not lending to these businesses,'' said Kirby Rosplock, the founder and chief executive of Tamarind Partners, a consultant to wealthy families. ''They're very tight on credit.''  One of Family Legacy Capital's first investments was in a group of high-end hotels on the West Coast that had tapped out its bank loans. The company had been owned by the same family for decades but was in danger of closing as guests disappeared in the pandemic. One of the fund's members found the investment. The owner didn't want to be identified for this article or to discuss the situation.  Investments like this keep family businesses in the family, avoiding a sale to a larger entity. This is often a major motivation among wealthy family investors, who can see some of themselves in the businesses they're helping.  ''A lot of times, the owners don't want an exit strategy,'' said Jennifer Pendergast, executive director of the John L. Ward Center for Family Enterprises at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University. ''What they need is money. A lot of times, investors have realized the secret sauce is the owners. You're giving up part of the value of the business if they go away.''  From the perspective of a wealthy family, there are pluses and minuses to the different ways of investing in family businesses.  Buying an ownership stake has the potential for unlimited appreciation. But since the investment is in a family business, not a public company, the investors have to understand the family and be comfortable with the way the family does business.  When investors agree to make a loan -- what's known as private credit lending -- their returns are going to be capped at whatever was agreed to. But as a lender, not an owner, the investors don't have to deal with any family issues.  ''A lot of families are doing the debt infusion so they don't have to wrestle with someone giving something up,'' said Bobby Stover, the family enterprise and family office leader for EY Americas. ''It's easier to negotiate the terms for debt than an equity investment where you worry about dilution and ownership.''  A debt investor ''can be a patient partner and not worry as much about the culture,'' he said.  If something goes wrong, the debt investors are higher up in the rankings of who gets repaid, which means they'll be ahead of any equity investors.  ''If it goes well, no one complains and everyone is happy,'' said Thorne Perkin, the president of Papamarkou Wellner Asset Management. ''Where I've seen problems arise is when things are not clearly stated upfront. Someone says, 'I want my money back,' but the borrower says, 'I don't have the money.' These things happen all the time.''  Family Legacy Capital structures its investments, which are all in the United States, as loans to family businesses that have $25 million to $100 million in revenue. The investments range from $10 million to $50 million and will last three to five years, though the fund expects many of the families to pay back the money in half that time as their businesses improve.  The fund expects annual returns in the low double digits, which is far higher than the investors could get with regular debt investments. But the higher returns take into account the higher risk that comes with investing in struggling businesses. Still, since the investments are secured by assets of the businesses, the fund's investors have recourse should families struggle to repay loans.  ''The low risk is a critical component for the families that invest in these companies,'' said Hendrik Jordaan, chairman and founder of Family Legacy Capital. ''We're bringing not only the capital but the family ethos.''  Mr. Jordaan also runs One Thousand & One Voices, a similar private equity fund that focuses on investments in Africa. Investors include the family of John Coors, a great-grandson of the founder of Coors Brewing.  Mr. Jordaan said bringing together families for a fund that was going to help other family businesses seemed like a natural response to the pandemic.  ''Imagine if you have one of the world's largest consumer manufacturing families in your investor base and you ask them, 'What family-owned companies in your supply chain have you done business with for decades but they're in trouble because of Covid?''' he said. ''If you know your partners are a community of families and you place value on your legacy being preserved, you're more likely to partner with a family. Our families want to know if their capital has made a difference.''  Mr. Widger said the Family Legacy Capital fund -- which includes three other wealthy families, who asked not to be named -- does research before making an investment. It asks questions about what the company is trying to create and how it is doing it. But the fund also wants to evaluate the family behind the business and understand what that family needs to keep its business operating successfully.  Culture is key, Mr. Widger said. ''Families can get dysfunctional, but family businesses tend to have a really attractive culture,'' he said. ''It's human nature to bring your children into your business. There's something in the chemistry of working with family members. But you've still got to be able to have a good vision.''  Charles Widger invested in a fund that makes loans to family-run businesses because ''I can relate to what these people are going through.'' He added, ''I wasn't a big conglomerate.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY HANNAH YOON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004s "
273		"    Puerto Rico's 'Worst Moment' Leaves an Island Exhausted  By Edmy Ayala and Patricia Mazzei  1,582 words 24 April 2021   8     The island saw explosive growth in coronavirus cases, fueled by business reopenings, Easter and tourists on spring break.  SAN JUAN, P.R. -- Throughout the pandemic, Dr. Víctor Ramos, a pediatrician, had not seen more than two Covid-19 patients hospitalized at the same time at San Jorge Children & Women's Hospital in San Juan, the Puerto Rican capital, where he works nights. When he left after one of his shifts a few days ago, the hospital's pediatric patient count had grown to 10.  ''We had never seen that,'' he said.  Some children were dehydrated after the coronavirus gave them high fevers, Dr. Ramos said, but others had the inflammatory syndrome that afflicts some children with Covid-19. One of the children hospitalized with severe Covid was just 3 months old, he said.  Puerto Rico has experienced its worst coronavirus outbreak of the pandemic over the past five weeks, with an explosive growth in cases exceeding records that had been set in December. Only this week did the numbers stop rising, giving the territory its first respite since the surge began in mid-March.  Behind the rise, experts say, was a confluence of factors, including the arrival of variants that probably made the virus more contagious right when people weary of staying home and hopeful about vaccines began to let their guard down, returning to work in person and shopping and dining indoors. Tourists poured in for spring break season. People gathered to celebrate Holy Week, a time when many are off work.  ''The government relaxed restrictions around January and February -- it opened the economy completely,'' said Mayor Luis Javier Hernández Ortiz of Villalba, a town in south-central Puerto Rico. ''This gave the virus opportunities to spread that it didn't have a year ago. Now the virus has the opportunity to spread in all places.''  The results were staggering. In early April, the island went from averaging about 200 new cases a day to about 800, according to a new_york_times database. In the week leading up to April 13, more than 7,100 cases were identified, a record. A two-week period this month saw cases grow by a remarkable 151 percent. At its peak, the positivity rate reached about 14 percent, according to the Puerto Rico Department of Health.  In response, scientists and physicians like Dr. Ramos, who is the president of the Puerto Rico College of Physicians and Surgeons, begged the public to follow masking and social distancing rules and urged elected officials to tighten pandemic restrictions. Hospitals still have bed capacity, Dr. Ramos said, but doctors and nurses are stretched thin. For years, Puerto Rico has lost many medical professionals to better-paying jobs in the states, leaving fewer of them to tend to the virus on the island.  ''Everyone is exhausted,'' Dr. Ramos said.  Jorge Manuel Rivera, 43, has seen it firsthand: His wife has been hospitalized in a San Juan hospital since late March. She does not have Covid-19 -- she had surgery and has been in and out of intensive care -- but the facility has been so full of Covid patients that there has not always been room for her in the I.C.U., he said.  ''You can tell that they are very, very overwhelmed,'' he said.  Mr. Rivera tested positive for the coronavirus two weeks ago and lost his sense of smell.  ''There are too many people who are not aware of what is happening,'' he said. ''You can read the numbers and statistics, but you don't understand it if you're not there.''  This month, the administration of Gov. Pedro R. Pierluisi shut down in-person instruction at schools because of the virus surge. Officials pushed up the start of a nightly curfew to 10 p.m. from midnight -- it is the only remaining blanket curfew in any state or territory -- and reduced indoor capacity to 30 percent from 50 percent for restaurants and businesses. Some mayors have adopted additional restrictions, including closing beaches. Masks remain mandatory in public places across the island.  Starting on April 28, travelers who do not show proof of a negative Covid-19 test upon their arrival will be fined $300 unless they submit a test result within 48 hours. (The previous rules allowed travelers the option of isolating for 10 days if they could not provide a negative test result. Some have been arrested after breaking quarantine orders.)  Scenes of tourists behaving badly -- flouting mask orders, crowding local hangouts and refusing to heed demands that they respect pandemic rules -- have routinely made headlines. But contact tracing suggests many of the new infections have come not directly from tourists, but from Puerto Ricans going to work, restaurants and shops in person, public health experts say.  Mr. Pierluisi, who took office in January, has resisted pressure for a more stringent partial lockdown endorsed by opposition lawmakers and recommended by his own coalition of experts. The coalition said malls and restaurants were not essential, signaling that they could be temporarily closed. The governor said in a news conference this week that the recent measures he did take were working but needed more time to fully take effect.  ''The situation is stabilizing,'' he said. ''There must be a very measured, very prudent approach to these types of decisions.''  His predecessor, Wanda Vázquez, imposed strict rules early on in the pandemic, ordering the country's first lockdown. That helped Puerto Rico avoid a drastic increase in cases for many months but also dearly cost the economy. Long lines formed to receive unemployment benefits.  The latest outbreak can be managed with more gradual measures, Mr. Pierluisi said, citing the existence of virus treatments, a contact tracing system in Puerto Rico's municipalities and the availability of vaccines.  About 1.65 million people -- about 31 percent of the population -- have received at least one vaccine dose, according to a Times database, which relies on statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr. Carlos Mellado López, the Puerto Rico health secretary, said in an interview that the Health Department estimated the number was actually higher, about 2.2 million people.  But one public health message -- get your shot -- might have blunted another -- be careful about the rapidly spreading virus -- said Mónica Feliú-Mojer, the director of communications at Ciencia Puerto Rico, a nonprofit group that supports scientists and their research.  ''So much public attention turned to vaccination,'' she said. ''The moment you stop hearing about all the cases, you stop hearing about the importance of preventing contagion. The numbers have been worrying for more than a month, epidemiologists were sounding the alarm and nobody was paying attention.''  The testing rate had dropped sharply before doubling in recent weeks, Dr. Mellado said. The health department is working to send more tests directly to primary care physicians to test people in their offices, free of charge.  Outside of public testing sites, private labs in Puerto Rico still require a doctor's order to conduct a gold-standard polymerase chain reaction test to detect the coronavirus, creating a barrier for socially vulnerable populations to find out if they are infected, said Melissa Marzán-Rodríguez, an epidemiologist and assistant professor of public health at Ponce Health Sciences University.  ''The situation has deteriorated so much over the past few weeks,'' she said. ''It might be the worst moment we've been through this past year.''  Her team is using a federal grant to train community members to help people overcome barriers to testing and vaccinations. One of them is Sister Faustina Rodríguez, a nun whose community organization has identified mostly older people living alone or in poor conditions in rural areas near Ponce, in southern Puerto Rico, who need basic aid such as masks and hand soap.  ''We went to one woman's home and all she had was the same mask she's been wearing since last year,'' Sister Faustina said.  There is also resistance to mask-wearing, testing -- ''Some people think it's going to hurt, up their nose,'' she said -- and vaccinations.  ''They don't believe in vaccines, and the Johnson & Johnson situation has only made it worse,'' Sister Faustina said, referring to the pause of that vaccine to study whether it causes blood clots. ''Or they say, 'Why should I get vaccinated if I can still catch it or have strong side effects?''' (She tells them she got the shot herself and felt fine.)  Lucía Santana Benítez, 52, who lives in a public housing complex in San Juan and runs a nonprofit group to feed her neighbors, caught the coronavirus last year, as did her son and husband. She described it as ''bad, bad, bad, bad -- I spent a week sweating, with a fever, pain. I couldn't even bathe.''  She initially did not want to get vaccinated, though she was promoting the vaccine in her community. But she decided to get the shot so she could visit her children and grandchildren, who live in Florida, Massachusetts and New Hampshire.  ''I'm being a responsible grandmother,'' Ms. Santana said.  A beach near a tourism-driven area of San Juan. Virus cases have shot up amid business reopenings, Easter and vacationers. Left, about 800 people a day are being vaccinated at a site overseen by the Puerto Rico National Guard in Bayamón. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERIKA P. RODRIGUEZ FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004r "
274		"    Millions Go Hungry as Virus Rips Through Brazil  By Ernesto Londoño, Flávia Milhorance and Victor Moriyama  1,652 words 24 April 2021   1     Tens of millions of Brazilians are facing hunger or food insecurity as the country's Covid-19 crisis drags on, killing thousands of people every day.  RIO DE JANEIRO -- Rail-thin teenagers hold placards at traffic stops with the word for hunger -- fome -- in large print. Children, many of whom have been out of school for over a year, beg for food outside supermarkets and restaurants. Entire families huddle in flimsy encampments on sidewalks, asking for baby formula, crackers, anything.  A year into the pandemic, millions of Brazilians are going hungry.  The scenes, which have proliferated in the last months on Brazil's streets, are stark evidence that President Jair Bolsonaro's bet that he could protect the country's economy by resisting public health policies intended to curb the virus has failed.  From the start of the outbreak, Brazil's president has been skeptical of the disease's impact, and scorned the guidance of health experts, arguing that the economic damage wrought by the lockdowns, business closures and mobility restrictions they recommended would be a bigger threat than the pandemic to the country's weak economy.  That trade-off led to one of the world's highest death tolls, but also foundered in its goal -- to keep the country afloat.  The virus is ripping through the social fabric, setting wrenching records, while the worsening health crisis pushes businesses into bankruptcy, killing jobs and further hampering an economy that has grown little or not at all for more than six years.  Last year, emergency government cash payments helped put food on the table for millions of Brazilians -- but when the money was scaled back sharply this year, with a debt crisis looming, many pantries were left bare.  About 19 million people have gone hungry over the past year -- nearly twice the 10 million who did so in 2018, the most recent year for which data were available, according to the Brazilian government and a study of privation during the pandemic by a network of Brazilian researchers focused on the issue.  And about 117 million people, or roughly 55 percent of the country's population, faced food insecurity, with uncertain access to enough nutrition, in 2020 -- a leap from the 85 million who did so two years previous, the study showed.  ''The way the government has handled the virus has deepened poverty and inequality,'' said Douglas Belchior, the founder of UNEafro Brasil, one of a handful of organizations that have banded together to raise money to get food baskets to vulnerable communities. ''Hunger is a serious and intractable problem in Brazil.''  Luana de Souza, 32, was one of several mothers who lined up outside an improvised food pantry on a recent afternoon hoping to score a sack with beans, rice and cooking oil. Her husband had worked for a company that organized events, but lost his job last year -- one of eight million people who joined Brazil's unemployment rolls during the pandemic, driving the rate above 14 percent, according to Brazil's Institute of Geography and Statistics.  At first the family managed by spending their government assistance carefully, she said, but this year, once the payments were cut, they struggled.  ''There is no work,'' she said. ''And the bills keep coming.''  Brazil's economy had gone into recession in 2014, and had not recovered when the pandemic hit. Mr. Bolsonaro often invoked the reality of families like Ms. de Souza's, who cannot afford to stay home without working, to argue that the type of lockdowns governments in Europe and other wealthy nations ordered to curb the spread of the virus were untenable in Brazil.  Last year, as governors and mayors around Brazil signed decrees shutting down nonessential businesses and restricting mobility, Mr. Bolsonaro called those measures ''extreme'' and warned that they would result in malnutrition.  The president also dismissed the threat of the virus, sowed doubts about vaccines, which his government has been slow to procure, and often encouraged crowds of supporters at political events.  As a second wave of cases this year led to the collapse of the health care system in several cities, local officials again imposed a raft of strict measures -- and found themselves at war with Mr. Bolsonaro.  ''People have to have freedom, the right to work,'' he said last month, calling the new quarantine measures imposed by local governments tantamount to living in a ''dictatorship.''  Early this month, as the daily death toll from the virus sometimes surpassed 4,000, Mr. Bolsonaro acknowledged the severity of the humanitarian crisis facing his country. But he took no responsibility and instead faulted local officials.  ''Brazil is at the limit,'' he said, arguing that the blame lay with ''whoever closed everything.''  But economists said that the argument that restrictions intended to control the virus would worsen Brazil's economic downturn was ''a false dilemma.''  In an open letter addressed to Brazilian authorities in late March, more than 1,500 economists and businesspeople asked the government to impose stricter measures, including lockdown.  ''It is not reasonable to expect economic activity to recover from an uncontrolled epidemic,'' the experts wrote.  Laura Carvalho, an economist, published a study showing that restrictions can have a negative short-term impact on a country's financial health, but that, in the long run, it would have been a better strategy.  ''If Bolsonaro had carried out lockdown measures, we would have moved earlier from the economic crisis,'' said Ms. Carvalho, a professor at the University of São Paulo.  Mr. Bolsonaro's approach had a broadly destabilizing effect, said Thomas Conti, lecturer at Insper, a business school.  ''The Brazilian real was the most devalued currency among all developing countries,'' Mr. Conti said. ''We are at an alarming level of unemployment, there is no predictability to the future of the country, budget rules are being violated, and inflation grows nonstop.''  The country's worsening Covid-19 crisis has left Mr. Bolsonaro politically vulnerable. The Senate this month began an inquiry into the government's handling of the pandemic. The study is expected to document missteps, including the government's endorsement of drugs that are ineffective to treat Covid-19 and shortages of basic medical supplies, including oxygen. Some of those missteps are likely to be blamed for preventable deaths.  Creomar de Souza, a political analyst and the founder of the consultancy Dharma Politics in Brasília, said the president underestimated the threat the pandemic posed to the country and failed to put together a comprehensive plan to address it.  ''They thought it wouldn't be something serious and figured that the health system would be able to handle it,'' he said.  Mr. de Souza said Mr. Bolsonaro has always campaigned and governed combatively, appealing to voters by presenting himself as an alternative to dangerous rivals. His response to the pandemic has been consistent with that playbook, he said.  ''The great loss, in addition to the increasing number of victims in this tragedy, is an erosion of governance,'' he said. ''We're facing a scenario of high volatility, with a lot of political risks, because the government didn't deliver on public policies.''  Advocacy and human rights organizations earlier this year started a campaign called Tem Gente Com Fome, or People are Going Hungry, with the aim of raising money from companies and individuals to get food baskets to needy people across the country.  Mr. Belchior, one of the founders, said the campaign was named after a poem by the writer and artist Solano Trindade. It describes scenes of misery viewed as a train in Rio de Janeiro makes its way across poor neighborhoods where the state has been all but absent for decades.  ''Families are increasingly pleading for earlier food deliveries,'' said Mr. Belchior. ''And they're depending more on community actions than the government.''  Carine Lopes, 32, the president of a community ballet school in Manguinhos, a low-income, working-class district of Rio de Janeiro, has responded to the crisis by turning her organization into an impromptu relief center.  Since the beginning of the pandemic, the price of basic products rose dramatically at nearby stores, she said. The cost of cooking oil more than tripled. A kilogram of rice goes for twice as much. As meat became increasingly prohibitive, Sunday outdoor cookouts became a rarity in the neighborhood.  Long used to fielding calls from parents who desperately wanted a slot for their children at the ballet school, Ms. Lopes has gotten used to a very different appeal. Old acquaintances and strangers text her daily asking about the food baskets the ballet school has been distributing weekly.  ''These moms and dads are only thinking about basic things now,'' she said. ''They call and say: 'I'm unemployed. I don't have anything else to eat this week. Is there anything you can give us?'''  When the virus finally recedes, the poorest families will have the hardest time bouncing back, she said.  Ms. Lopes despairs thinking of students who have been unable to tune in to online classes in households that have no internet connection, or where the only device with a screen belongs to a working parent.  ''No one will be able to compete for a scholarship with a middle-class student who managed to keep up with classes using their good internet and their tablets,'' she said. ''Inequality is being exacerbated.''  Brazilians lined up for soup and sandwiches in downtown São Paulo. About 117 million people nationwide are facing food insecurity. (A1); Handing out food in São Paulo, Brazil. ''There is no work,'' one woman said at a Rio de Janeiro pantry. ''And the bills keep coming.''; Above left, a food distribution center. Right, a homeless encampment. About 19 million Brazilians have gone hungry in the past year. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR MORIYAMA FOR THE new_york_times) (A6)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004p "
275		"    Trump Out of Office, a U.K. Agitator Shifts His Focus to Russia  By Jane Bradley and Michael Schwirtz  3,186 words 24 April 2021   1     The anti-Islam agitator Tommy Robinson struck gold in America. Keeping it might require help from Moscow, where other British far-right activists are also finding friends.  LONDON -- Two days after supporters of former President Donald J. Trump stormed the U.S. Capitol, but failed to reverse his election defeat, a defiant shout sounded from across the ocean. Tommy Robinson, Britain's loudest amplifier of anti-Islam, far-right anger, insisted the fight was not over.  ''You need to pick yourselves back up,'' Mr. Robinson said in an online video viewed tens of thousands of times. ''As Donald Trump says, it's only just beginning.''  A former soccer hooligan and founder of the English Defence League, one of Britain's most notorious nationalist groups, Mr. Robinson has largely been a pariah in his home country but Trump loyalists embraced him much the way they embraced many of the American extremist groups whose members would join the Capitol riot, including the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers.  Mr. Robinson appeared on Fox News and Infowars. A right-wing U.S. research institute even bankrolled a 2018 rally in London that foreshadowed the violence at the Capitol: Mr. Robinson's supporters attacked police officers in a street fight near Parliament. A month later, Representative Paul Gosar, Republican of Arizona, flew to London to speak at a second rally for Mr. Robinson.  His message? Keep fighting.  The Capitol riot on Jan. 6 has brought new scrutiny to the ties that bind the far right, not only within the United States but abroad. Few fringe figures have enjoyed more cross-national appeal than Tommy Robinson. Anti-Islam groups in Germany and Denmark have given him awards. Enrique Tarrio, the Proud Boys leader, called him an inspiration. At one point, the White House took up Mr. Robinson's cause directly, and the president's son tweeted his support.  Mr. Robinson's American connection was deeper than previously known. Interviews and internal documents newly released in court show how the U.S. research institute, the Middle East Forum, provided him with financial backing for three years, using cash from an American tech billionaire and Trump donor, while its president helped shape his message.  Now that Mr. Trump is out of office and the American money is apparently drying up, Mr. Robinson and some other far-right figures are turning to Moscow. Mr. Robinson, who is fighting a potentially costly libel case in London this week, did a media tour of Russia last year but three associates told The new_york_times that part of his agenda was kept secret -- to seek accounts with Russian banks.  ''Why else would you visit Russia?'' said Andrew Edge, a former senior figure in the English Defence League and another far-right group, Britain First, who said that he discussed moving money to Russian banks with Mr. Robinson and Britain First's leader, Paul Golding.  In many ways, Mr. Robinson is now useful to the Kremlin -- which has often encouraged fringe political figures who might destabilize Western democracies -- for the same reasons he was welcome in Mr. Trump's Washington.  He preached an angry narrative of Western civilization in decline, of a society ruled by shadowy elites and of the persistent threat of Muslims to the Western world -- never mind that he was an agent of chaos in Britain, a key American ally.  Not long after the November election, Mr. Robinson spoke with Mr. Tarrio and urged the Proud Boys to try to keep Mr. Trump in office. Weeks later, rioters stormed the Capitol.  ''I've always said that America needs a Tommy Robinson,'' Mr. Tarrio said.  Mr. Robinson has done four stints in prison and is banished from Twitter and Facebook. His criminal convictions bar him from the United States, and one of his jail terms was for illegally entering the country on another man's passport. Yet after one of Mr. Robinson's many arrests, the White House intervened, raising the issue of Mr. Robinson's arrest with Britain's ambassador in Washington.  For the Middle East Forum, a small Philadelphia-based research institute bankrolled by wealthy right-wing donors -- including Nina Rosenwald, an heir to the Sears fortune; and the Gatestone Institute, which has financial ties to the prominent Trump backers Rebekah and Robert Mercer -- Mr. Robinson became an anti-Islam cause célèbre.  In internal memos included in filings of an ongoing court case in Pennsylvania, Lisa Barbounis, a former deputy at the Middle East Forum, described how Mr. Robinson had sharply increased traffic to the group's social media accounts and website. Her boss, Daniel Pipes, the group's president, was sometimes frustrated with Mr. Robinson's excesses, such as when a video leaked in February 2019 that showed him bragging about scoring drugs in different countries.  But two months after that video appeared, the Middle East Forum donated to Mr. Robinson's legal defense fund.  ''Money follows Robinson,'' said Jim Dowson, a far-right activist who previously ran fund-raising for several British groups. ''The Americans love him.''  In an interview, Mr. Robinson denied all allegations and said they were based on ''has-been rejects of the patriot force'' who were working with ''far-left'' organizations and had been blackmailed by security services into supplying negative information about him.  David Gauke, a former Conservative lawmaker who served in the cabinet of then Prime Minister Theresa May, said Mr. Robinson was a marginalized figure, and that the Trump administration's support of him had been perplexing.  ''It was just embarrassing and irritating that our most important security partner and leadership figures in the U.S. were in any way endorsing him,'' Mr. Gauke said. ''It was a political and diplomatic headache.''  'Do Not Stop Fighting'  In 2018, Tommy Robinson was sent to prison for contempt of court. Arguably, it was the best thing to ever happen to him.  Mr. Robinson, 38, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was a street brawler from a working-class enclave north of London who attracted a fringe following by trafficking in anti-Islam, anti-immigrant hatred. Yet he was transformed in May 2018 when he set himself up outside a courthouse in Leeds.  Inside, a group of men mostly of Pakistani heritage were on trial, accused of running a gang that sexually exploited girls. Mr. Robinson livestreamed himself haranguing the defendants. He was arrested and later convicted under an English law designed to ensure a fair trial.  It was a public relations coup: His backers portrayed him as a fighter against injustice, working to expose rapists. In reality, the men were already on trial, facing stiff sentences, and Mr. Robinson's actions threatened to tank the case.  In the United States, the Middle East Forum was already posting articles that portrayed him as a martyr for free speech. Right-wing media outlets joined in, including Fox News's top prime-time host Tucker Carlson -- who declared that freedom of speech was ''dying'' in Britain. In response to a tweet about Mr. Robinson's arrest, Donald Trump Jr. replied: ''Don't let America follow in their footsteps.''  In London on June 9, 2018, thousands of Mr. Robinson's supporters with British flags and ''Free Tommy'' T-shirts gathered along Whitehall, a grand avenue lined with government offices, to demand his release. A few people waved Trump banners or wore MAGA hats. The far-right politician Anne Marie Waters railed against the ''Islamic tyranny and supremacy that plagues our great country.''  Then a group of Mr. Robinson's supporters charged at the police, swinging flag poles and other makeshift weapons as they chased officers down a side street. A group of protesters commandeered a double-decker sightseeing bus. Five police officers were injured.  To British authorities, it was an alarming spasm of violence a short walk from Parliament. To the Middle East Forum, the rally was an unabashed success. The organization later proudly declared that it had sponsored the event in Mr. Robinson's ''moment of danger.'' Mr. Pipes, the organization's president, said his group was ''vindicated.''  In an interview, Mr. Pipes acknowledged that Robert Shillman, a wealthy Trump supporter, was a Middle East Forum donor, though he declined to disclose who paid for the rally. But a person involved in organizing it, and who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr. Shillman, the chief executive of the technology company Cognex Corp., was a major funder of the rally. Middle East Forum internal communications also describe Mr. Shillman's involvement in funding for Mr. Robinson.  Mr. Shillman, who has previously been publicly identified as funding another project with Mr. Robinson, did not respond to requests for comment. Mr. Robinson said he had never spoken to Mr. Shillman but wished he had been able to thank him for ''all his shekels,'' a reference to the Israeli currency that is also a turn of phrase sometimes favored by anti-Semitic conspiracy theorists.  Internal communications and interviews reveal that the forum began supporting Mr. Robinson in 2017, and later helped to shape his message, seeking to steer him away from Brexit. The organization also tried unsuccessfully to enlist the help of Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Sebastian Gorka, a former White House adviser, to get a U.S. visa for a Robinson speaking tour.  The forum financed a second London rally in July, coinciding with a visit by Mr. Trump. Stephen Bannon, the president's former adviser, was also in London after touring Europe on a self-proclaimed mission to build a far-right political network. In a radio interview, Mr. Bannon called for Mr. Robinson's release and told British listeners that they were ''going to have to fight to take your country back.''  For the second rally, the forum flew in Mr. Gosar, the Trump loyalist from Arizona, who railed against immigrants and the political establishment.  Mr. Gosar also gave protesters a message that Mr. Trump would echo two years later in his speech before the Capitol riot: ''Do not stop fighting.''  Money Rolls In  Before 2018, Mr. Robinson had mostly relied on small donations from his working-class supporters in Britain, but the sudden attention from the United States opened floodgates for new money.  An analysis by The Times of Mr. Robinson's financial records, as well as publicly available information, suggests that he has brought in at least $2 million since 2018. He raised some money himself -- including by selling his gated home north of London for $1.1 million (810,000 pounds) -- but other funding came from generous international supporters. Between March and May of that year, Mr. Robinson received nearly £435,000 from supporters, many in the United States and Canada, according to Caolan Robertson, a former associate of Mr. Robinson who provided a screenshot showing the account balance from this period.  He said that Mr. Shillman paid roughly $7,000 a month, for a year, through a right-wing Canadian media outlet called Rebel Media, and that Alex Jones, the host of Infowars, ''transferred $20,000 to us every now and then to buy cameras and kit and grow our content.''  Bitcoin analysis also shows that Robinson received more than $60,000 in small donations between 2018 and 2020, according to John Bambenek, a computer security researcher.  Mr. Dowson, the far-right activist and fund-raiser, said Mr. Robinson once told him that he could introduce him to people in the United States ''who would give us £300,000 to provoke and stir up hate against Muslims.'' Mr. Robinson denied saying this.  Recently, questions have been raised about what Mr. Robinson has done with his money. None of the 10 companies linked to him in Britain have ever filed financial statements, despite legal requirements. Only two remain active and Mr. Robinson used his wife's name, or aliases, to run many of them.  In 2014, Mr. Robinson was jailed for 18 months for mortgage fraud and more recently, in March, he was accused by his former associate Mr. Robertson in a report from the news outlet The Independent of using donations to pay for prostitutes and cocaine, which he denied.  By his own admission, Mr. Robinson appreciates luxury. He once arrived in prison with Gucci flip flops.  ''I always knew the value of a pound and I always wanted nice things,'' he wrote in his 2015 autobiography.  Mr. Robinson's lifestyle could now be at risk, as the libel trial against him opened this week in London, centered on his response to a video posted online in November 2018.  The video showed a white teenager pushing a teenage Syrian refugee, Jamal Hijazi, to the ground and pouring water over his face, and it stirred near universal condemnation, including from Mrs. May, the prime minister. But Mr. Robinson quickly posted his own video accusing Jamal, without direct evidence, of violently attacking ''young English girls.'' The boy's family sued, saying Mr. Robinson had spread falsehoods that forced them to abandon their home in the face of threats.  Mr. Robinson's former associates say a loss could leave him penniless -- an impression he is cultivating. He recently filed for bankruptcy and officials are hunting for assets he may hold. Mr. Robinson said he had spent hundreds of thousands of pounds on legal costs.  In a recent podcast, Mr. Robinson said his wife had divorced him and that he was renting a room alongside four other divorced men.  ''Five losers living in a house together,'' he said.  Secret Russian Accounts?  By 2019, Mr. Robinson's American allies were growing impatient. By that spring, the Middle East Forum had paid $50,000 for legal fees and protests, and if Mr. Pipes liked the interest Mr. Robinson attracted, his antics and association with extremist groups like the Proud Boys were becoming embarrassing.  ''Could you gently caution him that our continued support requires him to stay away from the nasties?'' Mr. Pipes wrote at one point in a message to his colleague, Ms. Barbounis.  Mr. Robinson had already been banned from many social media platforms when, in February 2020, he posted a new video on YouTube. Dressed in a gray three-piece suit, Mr. Robinson is seen strolling through Moscow.  ''Red Square's beautiful,'' he said. ''I was surprised just how nice it is.''  ''I might move to Russia,'' he added.  Mr. Robinson's week in Russia was a full-throttle media tour, including a 30-minute interview with RT, the Kremlin's English-language propaganda channel, as well as an appearance at a packed auditorium in St. Petersburg, where he gave a lecture titled ''The Rape of Britain.''  In one interview, with a libertarian activist and Kremlin critic, Mikhail Svetov, Mr. Robinson explained that he had flown to Russia because he felt ''silenced in the U.K.''  ''I've come to seek a platform,'' he said.  By rushing to Moscow, Mr. Robinson was perpetuating a myth on the Western far right that portrays Russia as a defender of white conservative Christian values and its president, Vladimir V. Putin, as a paragon of valor. Russia also gives a platform to Western extremists blocked from social media.  ''By using Tommy Robinson, the Kremlin is obviously sowing chaos,'' Mr. Svetov said in an interview. ''But it's only happening because Tommy is cornered.''  Yet associates of Mr. Robinson said he wanted more than media exposure. Andrew Edge, once a top official in Britain First and the English Defence League, said Mr. Robinson had called him soon after he left prison in September 2019 to ask about bank accounts in Russia. Mr. Robinson was already facing the libel suit and wanted to hide his money, Mr. Edge said.  Before Mr. Robinson went to Moscow, Mr. Edge said he met with him and Paul Golding, the Britain First leader, for a dinner in which they discussed how to move money to Russia. Mr. Edge said Mr. Golding had already opened accounts there linked to his far-right group. Mr. Robinson also paid £300 to a local accountant in Dartford, near London, who advised him on how to move assets offshore, Mr. Edge said.  ''Paul then advised him to go speak to the Russians and talked about how they were helpful with bank accounts,'' said Mr. Edge, who provided a photograph of the three men at the restaurant. ''He's really worried about the Syrian boy getting his money.''  Mr. Edge said that Mr. Robinson later told him he had opened an account during his Russian tour. Edvard Chesnokov, who said he had chaperoned Mr. Robinson during the visit, confirmed that Mr. Robinson had discussed the possibility of opening bank accounts. But he said that as far as he knew Mr. Robinson did not actually do it.  ''We could just evaluate, discuss theoretically that there were Russian banks,'' Mr. Chesnokov, the deputy foreign editor of Komsomolskaya Pravda, Russia's largest tabloid, said in an interview. ''If your assets are being frozen you need some reserve, don't you? All that remained theoretical discussions.''  Mr. Golding said that he had spoken ''extensively'' with Mr. Robinson about his traveling to Moscow, which his group has visited several times, but there was ''no mention'' of bank accounts. He added that Britain First was planning greater collaboration with Russia after being ''deplatformed,'' including financially, in its home country, though he did not respond to questions about any banking arrangements involved.  In a phone interview that he filmed, Mr. Robinson joked that he had gone to Moscow to find a Russian wife, but denied opening or discussing opening any bank accounts in Russia, or holding assets outside Britain.  He said he had simply accepted an invitation to speak in a country that welcomed him more warmly than his own.  ''I wanted to go and see what Russia was like and try to understand the freedom aspect because our politicians and journalists go on about how Russians have no free speech, how Russians have no freedom,'' he said.  ''But I wanted just to let them know that we don't over here, we have a facade.''  It is a message that the Kremlin's propaganda networks dutifully conveyed.  The British far-right activist Tommy Robinson at a march in London in 2018 in support of Brexit. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW TESTA FOR THE new_york_times); Protesters scuffled with police officers during a gathering by supporters of Mr. Robinson in London in June 2018. Left, members of the Australian Liberty Alliance outside the British Consulate showing support for the jailed activist. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANIEL LEAL-OLIVAS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; WILLIAM WEST/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Daniel Pipes, the president of a research group funded by rightwing donors that contributed to Mr. Robinson's legal defense. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LAJOS SOOS/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK); Mr. Robinson expressed support for the rioters who stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6 with the intent of overturning the election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON ANDREW FOR THE new_york_times) (A10)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004o "
276		"   THE SATURDAY PROFILE  Spanish Nun With Medical Training Champions Vaccine Distrust  By Nicholas Casey  1,502 words 24 April 2021   12     Sister Teresa Forcades, Spain's most provocative Catholic nun, is at odds with governments, medical experts and even Pope Francis, who endorse the coronavirus vaccines. Pandemic denial groups are spreading her views.  MONTSERRAT, Spain -- Sister Teresa Forcades came to public notice years ago for her unflinching liberal views: an outspoken Roman Catholic nun whose pronouncements ran counter to the church's positions on same-sex marriage and abortion.  She became a fixture on Spanish television, appearing in her nun's habit to advocate independence for her native region of Catalonia, and to debate other hot-button topics, including vaccines. She had trained as a doctor, partly in the United States and argued that vaccinations might one day pose a danger to a free society.  Now a decade later, with the coronavirus having swept the world, she believes that day is here. She is warning against the use of coronavirus vaccines, even as scientists and elected leaders worry that anti-vaccine sentiment could threaten Europe's recovery from the pandemic.  ''It's always important that criticism is possible, to have dissenting voices,'' she said of her views, which center as much on her doubts about the vaccines as her right to question them in public. ''The answer cannot be that in the time of a crisis, society cannot allow the criticism -- it's precisely then that we need it.''  What she calls criticism, though, is seen by many in the scientific community as spreading misinformation. From her perch in a hilltop convent, Sister Teresa now finds herself at odds with governments, medical experts and even Pope Francis, who say vaccination campaigns are the only escape route from a pandemic that has killed more than three million people and ravaged global economies.  In the world of vaccine skeptics, Sister Teresa, who was born in 1966 to a nurse and a commercial agent, is hard to categorize. She acknowledges that some vaccines are beneficial, but opposes making them mandatory. Her misgivings about coronavirus vaccines largely stem from her view that pharmaceutical companies are not to be trusted, and the clinical trials were rushed.  She draws credibility from her nun's habit and medical training, which has made her especially appealing to conspiracy theorists and far right groups that seek to undermine public confidence in vaccines by spreading half truths that are sometimes mixed with facts, nuanced and delivered by people with credentials that give their voice the imprimatur of authority.  José M. Martín-Moreno, a professor of preventive medicine and public health in Spain who has been critical of Sister Teresa, said she cloaks her challenges to prevailing scientific wisdom under the guise of scientific debate and her right to criticize.  ''I never doubted her good intentions,'' said Dr. Martín-Moreno. ''But the most dangerous people are those who have half-truths, because they have an element of truth somewhere.''  This fight for public opinion couldn't come at a more crucial hour.  The world is in the midst of an experiment without precedent -- the rapid development and rollout of coronavirus vaccines, which have not yet stood the test of time, to a global population. There have been relatively few serious side effects, and the vaccines have proved highly effective in warding off severe illness and death. There is also evidence suggesting they prevent infections, likely slowing transmission.  But the detection of rare, though sometimes fatal, blood clots in a small number of people who received the AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson vaccines has led some governments to pause or limit both shots -- and to increased vaccine hesitancy.  In the Spanish capital, Madrid, in the days after the government raised the age threshold for the AstraZeneca shot over concerns about its effectiveness, only a third of people showed up for their vaccine appointments, officials said. The country is at the start of what appears to be a fourth wave of infections.  Despite her relative isolation in the convent, Sister Teresa's message is increasingly reaching people across Spain.  A 120,000-member group in Spain known for far-right conspiracies often spreads her controversial advice about coronavirus treatments on the Telegram messaging app. Another popular group that even denies the existence of the pandemic recently praised a Facebook video in which she questioned the safety of coronavirus vaccines.  Sister Teresa, though staunchly leftist, doesn't distance herself from right-wing followers, calling her distrust of some vaccines a ''transversal question able to reach a wide spectrum of people.''  Sitting in her convent on a recent day, she offered a window into her reasoning. She argued with data, some of it taken from clinical trials, but often arrived at a conclusion that few in the medical world accept: that corporations, driven by profits, cannot be trusted to deliver safe vaccines.  She said her views were shaped well before she became a nun, during a medical residency in the U.S. from 1992 to 1995. She recalled a patient in her Buffalo, N.Y., hospital who needed an amputation. After his limb was removed and he needed a prosthesis, the insurance company refused to pay for it.  ''It was an example of brutality because it underlined a mix of economic interests and the basic human needs of health care,'' she said.  In 1997, she returned to Spain and took a room at the Convent of Sant Benet Montserrat. The stone building sits in a pine grove under the Montserrat massif, which rises high above a valley outside Barcelona, in the northeastern region of Catalonia.  There, with time to think, she realized that her calling would be as a nun in a Benedictine order. She didn't go on to practice medicine.  Soon, she was pushing the boundaries of religious scholarship. She helped develop theology that sought an equal role for women in Christianity and questioned interpretations of the Bible that favored men.  But health care remained in her thoughts.  In 2006, she wrote a 45-page manifesto titled ''The Crimes of Big Pharma.'' Asserting that pharmaceutical companies were an enemy of public health, it used as an example a patent dispute between African governments and drugmakers over AIDS medication.  ''I was in shock,'' she said in the interview, because she had believed that pharmaceutical companies work for the good of humanity.  Her mistrust of Big Pharma steadily deepened as other drugmaker scandals emerged, and she concluded that the push for profits was irreconcilable with public health.  Then in 2009, an outbreak of the H1N1 ''swine flu'' virus became a pandemic. Governments began discussing a mass vaccination campaign, and which corporations they might work with.  Sister Teresa spoke out against those efforts in an online video that received 1.2 million views and was translated into eight languages before Vimeo, the video-streaming platform, removed the channel where it was posted.  In the 55-minute broadcast, she appeared in nun's habit and introduced herself as a physician. At first, she echoed established science, saying that the virus was less deadly than past flu outbreaks. Then she took a turn into conspiracy theory.  She recounted an incident that year in which the health care company Baxter said it had mistakenly mixed two strains of flu in a laboratory, resulting in the deaths of test animals. Baxter, which later produced a swine flu vaccine, said that no one had been hurt, but experts said at the time that they were troubled by the mistake.  But in her mind, a lab mistake became something more sinister and suspicious: Sister Teresa, in the video, alleged without evidence that Baxter might have been trying to manufacture new viruses with the aim of profiting from potential vaccines, especially if their use became mandatory.  ''How is it possible that they could force me to take a vaccine that I don't want?'' she said.  As the coronavirus began to spread across the globe last year, Sister Teresa said she felt that history was repeating itself.  ''They have a series of secret contracts, at prices many times what they should be,'' she said of companies producing the coronavirus vaccines.  Dr. Martín-Moreno, who has worked with the World Health Organization, shares her concerns about the contracts. He said that some frustration about the AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine trials -- whose results have been widely questioned for having used outdated information, among other issues -- was merited.  But he added that Sister Teresa has gone too far and that her fame had become dangerous.  Sister Teresa argues that she poses no danger, and that her questions about vaccines, posed long before the pandemic, had simply come before their time.  The thought sometimes frustrated her, she said in an email. ''But then I remember Jesus and some of the saints I love and I feel in good company.''  Leire Ariz Sarasketa contributed reporting from Madrid.  Sister Teresa is part of the Convent of Sant Benet Montserrat, near Barcelona. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAMUEL ARANDA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004m "
277		"    A Crisis in San Francisco As Fentanyl Deaths Soar  By Thomas Fuller  1,549 words 24 April 2021   21     More people died from overdoses than from the coronavirus in San Francisco last year. Some think the toll, tied to homelessness, should force the city to re-examine its approach to illicit drugs.  SAN FRANCISCO -- The drugs killed them in plain view -- in front of the public library, at the spot on Powell Street where the cable car used to turn around. Others died alone in single-room apartments or in camping tents pitched on the pavement, each death adding to an overdose crisis that is one of the worst in the nation.  Drug overdoses rose across the country during the coronavirus pandemic. But in San Francisco, they skyrocketed, claiming 713 lives last year, more than double the 257 people here who died of the virus in 2020.  San Francisco's overdose death rate is higher than West Virginia, the state with the most severe crisis, and three times the rates of New York and Los Angeles. Although overdose data from the past year is incomplete, one researcher found that San Francisco -- where overdoses have more than tripled since 2017 -- has more overdoses per capita than any major city on the West Coast.  The drug deaths in San Francisco -- about two a day -- stem from a confluence of despair. Fentanyl, an opioid that was not a severe problem for the city just a few years ago, has fully permeated its illicit drug market and was a factor in most overdoses last year. A culture of relative tolerance toward drug use has allowed it to spread quickly. And fentanyl, much more powerful than heroin, has found fertile ground among the city's thousands of homeless residents, who have died of overdoses in large numbers.  For officials in San Francisco who have prided themselves on their handling of health emergencies, from H.I.V. four decades ago to Covid-19 today, the epidemic of overdose deaths has been both humbling and alarming. Many believe that the city's preoccupation with the pandemic has eclipsed concern over the drug deaths and blunted the urgency of the moment.  ''I can say for sure that what we are doing is not working and that it's getting worse every single day,'' said Matt Haney, a member of the city's Board of Supervisors who represents the Tenderloin, a district of low-income housing in the heart of the city that has seen the most overdoses. ''I get offered drugs every time I step outside. It's overwhelming.''  Unlike areas in the rural Midwest that have also been devastated by fentanyl, San Francisco has a well-funded and sophisticated public health system. The overdose crisis is calling into question the city's nonjudgmental tolerance of illicit drugs and adequacy of its programs that focus on providing users with clean needles and medication to reverse overdoses.  City officials say they want to reinforce and expand this so-called harm reduction model. Critics agree harm reduction is necessary, but say something needs to be done to curtail the supply of drugs and reach out more aggressively to addicts, especially when the difference between life and death is measured in milligrams.  On a recent morning in the Tenderloin, Amber Neri sat outside a boarded-up shop, casually using a torch to heat up a fentanyl mixture on a piece of foil. Blocks from City Hall, she paused before inhaling the drug. ''Ten? Fifteen?'' she said when asked how many of her friends had overdosed.  A former nursing assistant from Silicon Valley, Ms. Neri spoke of the dangers of living on the street and witnessing the beating death of her boyfriend in an alley in August 2019. As she talked about fentanyl, a young man in distress nearby interjected. ''This stuff,'' he yelled, ''is so hard to quit.''  Minutes later two police officers approached. They politely asked Ms. Neri and other users, most of them homeless, to move to the other side of the street. ''People used to say, 'Put away your pipes! The cops are coming,''' she said. ''Now the cops don't make them put them away anymore.''  The city has seen deadlier public health emergencies. At the height of the AIDS epidemic in San Francisco in the early 1990s, the disease was killing 33 people a week. Overdoses killed an average of about 16 people a week in San Francisco the first three months of this year.  But the dangerous mix of fentanyl with the city's existing homelessness crisis has experts worried that the pace of overdose deaths could increase because of the intractable nature of both problems.  Unlike in East Coast and colder-climate cities that have vast shelter systems, most homeless people in San Francisco sleep on the streets. During the pandemic, the city has housed several thousand homeless residents in hotels and trailers but thousands more continue to sleep outdoors.  Alex Kral, an epidemiologist, has conducted surveys of drug users in San Francisco for the past quarter-century. The percentage of people in these surveys who are homeless has risen from roughly 25 percent when he first began his research to about 80 percent today.  ''You can't disentangle the overdose mortality crisis from the housing crisis,'' Dr. Kral said. ''They are completely interlinked.''  San Francisco sits in a paradoxical position in the American imagination. To those on the right, it is Nancy Pelosi's district, the city of out-of-control government spending and socialist ideals. Yet the city also sits at the center of a brand of razor-sharp American capitalism of tech entrepreneurs and venture capitalists vying to be the next graduating class of billionaires.  During the pandemic, the city has been quiet, with tech workers on Zoom at home and a dearth of commuters leaving the streets unclogged. Yet in neighborhoods like the Tenderloin, the sidewalks have still hummed with the commerce of drug dealing.  The Tenderloin police precinct seized 5,449 grams of fentanyl in 2020, four times more than the previous year. In this compact neighborhood of 50 square blocks, it was enough, in theory, to kill 2.7 million people.  The fentanyl crisis is distinct from previous opioid crises because an overdose can occur minutes after taking the drug, said Peter Davidson, an assistant professor at the University of California, San Diego.  ''With heroin you typically have one to two hours between last use and when you stop breathing -- a pretty big window for someone to find you and to do something about it,'' said Dr. Davidson, the researcher calculating overdose rates in West Coast cities. ''With fentanyl you're talking about five to 15 minutes.''  The fast-acting nature of the drug makes loneliness deadly. As a nasal spray or injection, naloxone is used on drug users who have stopped breathing or show other signs of an overdose. But it only works when other people are around.  The Drug Overdose Prevention and Education Project, an initiative funded by the city, gave out more than 50,000 doses of naloxone last year, said Kristen Marshall, the project manager. About 4,300 overdoses were reversed using the lifesaving drug, she said.  ''We would have had thousands of dead bodies,'' Ms. Marshall said.  As the drug deaths have surged, the city's strategy has been to double down on the harm reduction policies that were successful in reducing heroin overdose deaths.  ''We have had some success and we have to grow our successes,'' Dr. Hali Hammer, who oversees overdose prevention for the city's Department of Public Health. Part of the answer is to more widely distribute naloxone, she said.  ''What we as the public health department are responsible for is preventing death by giving people the resources they need to use safely,'' Dr. Hammer said.  Mr. Haney, the city supervisor, is critical of this approach. Reversing overdoses, he argued, was necessary but not enough.  ''If all you're doing is handing out what someone needs to use it's tragically inadequate,'' he said.  In the Tenderloin, everyone seems to have an overdose story.  Darell Thomas, who works for a nonprofit organization, recalled the man in his 50s who lay motionless on the sidewalk two weeks ago. Mr. Thomas squirted a dose of naloxone into the man's nose but it was too late. ''He was gone,'' Mr. Thomas said.  On a recent afternoon, the police chief, Bill Scott, toured the Tenderloin with top aides.  Drug dealers walked around corners as they approached. A shirtless man sat in the middle of the street, prompting the chief's entourage to call for medical assistance. Along Market Street, the wide boulevard that cleaves downtown, the chief paused to tell a fentanyl user to put away two hypodermic needles that lay on the pavement.  ''Keep it clean,'' the chief said.  ''I get offered drugs every time I step outside. It's overwhelming,'' said Matt Haney, a city supervisor who represents the Tenderloin.; A street corner in the Tenderloin is a market for illegal drugs. Fentanyl, an opioid, was a factor in most overdoses last year.; The police precinct in the Tenderloin district seized 5,449 grams of fentanyl in 2020, four times more than the previous year. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004i "
278		"    The G.O.P. Isn't Done Messing With Elections  By Richard L. Hasen  1,528 words 24 April 2021   23     Not content with limiting voting rights, they are threatening the integrity of vote counting itself.  A new, more dangerous front has opened in the voting wars, and it's going to be much harder to counteract than the now-familiar fight over voting rules. At stake is something I never expected to worry about in the United States: the integrity of the vote count. The danger of manipulated election results looms.  We already know the contours of the battle over voter suppression. The public has been inundated with stories about Georgia's new voting law, from Major League Baseball's decision to pull the All-Star Game from Atlanta to criticism of new restrictions that prevent giving water to people waiting in long lines to vote. With lawsuits already filed against restrictive aspects of that law and with American companies and elite law firms lined up against Republican state efforts to make it harder to register and vote, there's at least a fighting chance that the worst of these measures will be defeated or weakened.  The new threat of election subversion is even more concerning. These efforts target both personnel and policy; it is not clear if they are coordinated. They nonetheless represent a huge threat to American democracy itself.  Some of these efforts involve removing from power those who stood up to President Donald Trump's attempts to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The Georgia law removes the secretary of state from decision-making power on the state election board. This seems aimed clearly at Georgia's current Republican secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, punishing him for rejecting Mr. Trump's entreaties to ''find'' 11,780 votes to flip Joe Biden's lead in the state.  But the changes will apply to Mr. Raffensperger's successor, too, giving the legislature a greater hand in who counts votes and how they are counted. Michigan's Republican Party refused to renominate Aaron Van Langevelde to the state's canvassing board. Mr. Van Langevelde voted with Democrats to accept Michigan's Electoral College vote for Mr. Biden as legitimate. He was replaced by Tony Daunt, the executive director of a conservative Michigan foundation that is financially backed by the DeVos family.  Even those who have not been stripped of power have been censured by Republican Party organizations, including not just Mr. Raffensperger and Georgia's Republican governor, Brian Kemp, but also Barbara Cegavske, the Republican secretary of state of Nevada who ran a fair election and rejected spurious arguments that the election was stolen. The message that these actions send to politicians is that if you want a future in state Republican politics, you had better be willing to manipulate election results or lie about election fraud.  Republican state legislatures have also passed or are considering laws aimed at stripping Democratic counties of the power to run fair elections. The new Georgia law gives the legislature the power to handpick an election official who could vote on the state election board for a temporary takeover of up to four county election boards during the crucial period of administering an election and counting votes. That provision appears to be aimed at Democratic counties like Fulton County that have increased voter access. A new Iowa law threatens criminal penalties against local election officials who enact emergency election rules and bars them from sending voters unsolicited absentee ballot applications.  A Texas bill would similarly stymie future efforts like the one in Harris County to expand access to the ballot and give challengers at the polls the ability not only to observe but also to interfere with polling place procedures meant to ensure election integrity. According to a new report by Protect Democracy, Law Forward and the States United Democracy Center, Republican legislators have proposed at least 148 bills in 36 states that could increase the chances of cooking the electoral books.  State legislatures and others also have been taking steps to amplify false claims that the 2020 election was stolen, solidifying the false belief among a majority of Republican voters that the November vote count was unfair. It's not just the hearings featuring charlatans like Rudy Giuliani or Sidney Powell spewing the big lie. It's also steps like the Arizona State Senate demanding the seizure of November ballots from Democratic-leaning Maricopa County and ordering an audit of the votes to be conducted by a proponent of the bogus ''Stop the Steal'' movement who falsely contended that the election was rigged against Mr. Trump. Never mind that Arizona's vote count has been repeatedly subject to examination by courts and election officials with no irregularities found.  Combating efforts that can undermine the fair administration of elections and vote counting is especially tricky. Unlike issues of voter suppression, which are easy to explain to the public (what do you mean you can't give water to voters waiting in long lines?!?), the risks of unfair election administration are inchoate. They may materialize or they may not, depending on how close an election is and whether Mr. Trump himself or another person running for office is willing to break democratic norms and insist on an unfair vote count.  So what can be done? To begin with, every jurisdiction in the United States should be voting with systems that produce a paper ballot that can be recounted in the event of a disputed election. Having physical, tangible evidence of voters' choices, rather than just records on electronic voting machines, is essential to both guard against actual manipulation and protect voter confidence in a fair vote count. Such a provision is already contained in H.R. 1, the mammoth Democrat-sponsored voting bill.  Next, businesses and civic leaders must speak out not just against voter suppression but also at efforts at election subversion. The message needs to be that fair elections require not just voter access to the polls but also procedures to ensure that the means of conducting the election are fair, auditable and verifiable by representatives of both political parties and nongovernmental organizations.  Congress must also fix the rules for counting Electoral College votes, so that spurious objections to the vote counts like the ones we saw on Jan. 6 from senators and representatives, including Senators Josh Hawley and Ted Cruz, are harder to make. It should take much more than a pairing of a single senator and a single representative to raise an objection, and there must be quick means to reject frivolous objections to votes fairly cast and counted in the states.  Congress can also require states to impose basic safeguards in the counting of votes in federal elections. This is not part of the H.R. 1 election reform bill, but it should be, and Article I, Section 4 of the Constitution gives Congress wide berth to override state laws in this area.  Finally, we need a national effort to support those who will count votes fairly. Already we are seeing a flood of competent election administrators retiring from their often-thankless jobs, some after facing threats of violence during the 2020 vote count. Local election administrators need political cover and the equivalent of combat pay, along with adequate budget resources to run fair elections. It took hundreds of millions of dollars in private philanthropy to hold a successful election in 2020; that need for charity should not be repeated.  If someone running for secretary of state endorses the false claim that the 2020 election was stolen, they should be uniformly condemned. Support should go to those who promote election integrity, regardless of party, and who put in place fair and transparent procedures. Ultimately, we need to move toward a more nonpartisan administration of elections and create incentives for loyalty to the integrity of the democratic process, not to a political party.  We may not know until January 2025, when Congress has counted the Electoral College votes of the states, whether those who support election integrity and the rule of law succeeded in preventing election subversion. That may seem far away, but the time to act to prevent a democratic crisis is now. It may begin with lawsuits against new voter-suppression laws and nascent efforts to enshrine the right to vote in the Constitution. But it is also going to require a cross-partisan alliance of those committed to the rule of law -- in and out of government -- to ensure that our elections continue to reflect the will of the people.  Richard L. Hasen (@rickhasen) is a professor of law and political science at the University of California, Irvine, and the author of ''Election Meltdown: Dirty Tricks, Distrust and the Threat to American Democracy.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Selman Design FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00042 "
279		"    After Weeks of Stoking Fears, Putin Dials Back Aggression Toward Ukraine and Navalny  By Anton Troianovski  1,455 words 24 April 2021   9     The Russian president pulled back troops from Ukraine's border and relented on medical treatment for his nemesis Aleksei A. Navalny, after a performance blending fear and force to affirm his power.  KYIV, Ukraine -- The Russian president went up to the brink -- and then, with the eyes of the world upon him, stepped back from it.  State television images on Friday showed Russian forces that had massed near Ukraine, sparking fears of an imminent full-scale war in Europe, being loaded onto trains and ships to be pulled back. The same day, the imprisoned opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny announced he was ending his three-week hunger strike because his demands for independent medical care had, at last, sufficiently been met.  The performative blend of fear, suspense and force that President Vladimir V. Putin deploys to affirm his power reached a crescendo this week, illuminating the ever-harder-line tactics to which he is prepared to resort to cement and project his influence. Yet it also became clear by Friday that Mr. Putin saw the anxiety he was able to induce at home and abroad as a tool to be modulated depending on changing circumstances or in the service of a broader aim.  It was a distillation, in short, of Mr. Putin's tactical, high-stakes rule that evokes his past as an officer in the K.G.B.: keeping the adversary guessing and off balance, while also being prepared to exercise restraint as long as he can save face.  ''This is theater, in part,'' said Gleb Pavlovsky, a former top adviser to Mr. Putin, referring to the week's drama. ''But it is theater that is important for our system.''  It was a week that shed light on the logic of Mr. Putin's new Cold War -- a term that his own former prime minister, Dmitri A. Medvedev, used in an article published by a Russian government news agency on Friday. In his conflict with the West, Mr. Putin depends on the threat of escalation, a tactic that has taken on increasingly dire forms as the conflict has intensified.  The week began with 100,000 Russian troops gathered on Ukraine's doorstep; Mr. Navalny near death in prison, according to his associates; and Mr. Putin gearing up for an annual state-of-the-nation speech at which analysts predicted he could reveal a plan to annex part of Ukraine or merge with neighboring Belarus.  Mr. Putin did neither in his speech on Wednesday, spending most of it on domestic issues as granular as discounts on children's summer camps. The same evening, when thousands of Mr. Navalny's supporters mounted protests nationwide, the police in many cities took an extraordinarily hands-off approach -- arresting just 32 people in Moscow, for instance, compared to more than 1,900 at a pro-Navalny rally on Jan. 31.  On Thursday, Mr. Putin's defense minister announced a partial pullback of troops, a step welcomed by Ukraine's president in a nervous Kyiv. Mr. Putin held out an olive branch to President Biden by appearing at his online climate summit. And on Friday, Mr. Navalny said his hunger strike demanding better medical care had ''achieved enough'' after he was examined twice by civilian doctors.  ''No matter how much the system tries to show itself to be a deaf-mute, thousand-ton monolith, it in fact continues to react to pressure from inside and outside,'' a top aide to Mr. Navalny, Leonid Volkov, posted on Twitter.  In Mr. Medvedev's article interpreting the week's events published on Friday morning, he compared the current state of world affairs to the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, when the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war. The problem today, unlike the original Cold War war, he wrote, was that the United States no longer respected Russia's strength.  ''If the consequences of victory are so great that they put in question the continued existence of the victor, then this is not a victory,'' Mr. Medvedev, the deputy chairman of Mr. Putin's Security Council, wrote in a not-so-veiled reference to Russia's nuclear arsenal.  A risk of Mr. Putin's escalatory approach to foreign policy is that he may need to up the ante to achieve the desired effect. That was the case with Russia's troop buildup near Ukraine. While the war in eastern Ukraine has lasted since 2014, with Moscow sending arms and men to the separatists it backs, the Kremlin had not since the outset of hostilities threatened as explicitly to openly invade Ukraine as it did in recent weeks.  Mr. Pavlovsky, who advised the Kremlin until 2011, compares Mr. Putin's system to a ratchet: a mechanism that, even with occasional pauses, can only turn in one direction.  ''When the system is all built on the principle of escalation, it cannot pull back in earnest,'' he said.  In Kyiv, some officials and Western diplomats believe that Mr. Putin's troop buildup was an expensive and high-wire effort to rattle a Ukrainian government that had taken a tougher turn against Russia in recent months. It was also a message to Mr. Biden, they say, that Russia continued to insist on its dominance of the post-Soviet space, no matter what sanctions may come its way.  ''He thinks he needs to sit down at the table with the Americans and make a deal on dividing up spheres of influence,'' said Oleksiy Danilov, the national security adviser of President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, describing his view of Mr. Putin's ultimate motive.  By this week, Mr. Putin had sent his message, with Ukraine preparing for the possibility of full-scale war. Mr. Biden last week called and invited him to meet, giving the Kremlin the welcome opportunity to leave open the possibility that Mr. Putin might not even accept.  ''We have also heard the words from our American counterparts about their readiness to carry on a dialogue on issues of mutual interest,'' Mr. Putin's spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, said on Friday. ''But unfortunately, the Americans' declarations have not coincided with concrete actions.''  Mr. Putin's next crisis might not come with as smooth a path to de-escalation. And some of the Russian troops being pulled back from near the Ukrainian border Friday were ordered to leave their armored vehicles behind, underscoring the continuing tensions in that conflict.  ''The danger is that he has this total obsession with not seeming weak,'' Kadri Liik, a policy fellow at the European Council of Foreign Relations in Berlin, said of Mr. Putin. ''That of course puts a double burden on others -- you need to keep the way for retreat open for him, as well.''  At home, the softening that Mr. Putin has signaled with the improved treatment of Mr. Navalny and the police's light touch at Wednesday's protests is likely to be short-lived. Next week, a Moscow court will consider a bid by prosecutors to outlaw Mr. Navalny's organization outright -- a step that could pave the way for a new wave of criminal cases against the opposition.  And on Friday, the Justice Ministry declared one of the most popular Russian-language news sites, Meduza, to be a ''foreign agent.'' The designation will make it more difficult for the Latvia-based news organization to operate in Russia and marks a major step in the Kremlin's battle against independent media.  To be sure, even those close to Russia's ruling elite sometimes caution against trying to identify a single coherent strategy in the Kremlin's moves. Konstantin Remchukov, a newspaper editor who ran the re-election campaign of the mayor of Moscow in 2018, said that some powerful factions push Mr. Putin toward even more hard-line policies than he is personally inclined to pursue -- an ''under-the-carpet dogfight in the Kremlin.''  While the country as a whole suffers economically from sanctions, some factions in the elite benefit from businesses substituting for imports blocked by those measures, or from military contracts, Mr. Remchukov said. These groups also include the powerful leadership in the security services, who reap greater resources and influence when tensions rise.  These groups are seen as pushing for confrontational policies that Mr. Putin sometimes has to rein in, Mr. Remchukov said. The dynamic is pushing Russia, he added, into an era of ''geopolitical solitude.''  Andrew E. Kramer and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow.  President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia addressed the nation Wednesday while Navalny supporters protested. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004h "
280		"    Students Say Popular Teacher Was Harasser  By Julia Jacobs and Zachary Small  2,044 words 24 April 2021   1     Six former University of Michigan students have filed legal papers accusing a former lecturer of sexually harassing them and the school of not doing enough to protect them.  During 16 years teaching at the University of Michigan, Bruce Conforth stocked his lectures with tales from a life filled with boldfaced names: He had rubbed elbows with Bob Dylan, played music alongside B.B. King, apprenticed for the abstract expressionist Willem de Kooning and befriended the poet Allen Ginsberg.  Students clamored to enroll in his courses on blues music and the American counterculture, later raving about how he had changed their lives.  A musician, scholar and founding curator of the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, Mr. Conforth was a riveting lecturer who, in his trademark black vest and jeans, could discuss everything from Buddhism to psychedelics, and who, in 2012, was chosen teacher of the year by students.  ''There was almost a celebrity-like aura around him,'' said Amelia Brown, who took a Conforth class called ''Beatniks, Hippies and Punks'' in 2016. ''It wasn't a normal class. He would go on these long tangents about life and spirituality.''  But there was a dark side to Mr. Conforth, according to Ms. Brown and other women who said the teacher used his charisma and, sometimes, Svengali-like manipulation to sexually harass his students.  In 2008, one recent graduate complained to the university that Mr. Conforth, a lecturer in the American Culture Department, had propositioned her when she was a student. The university put him on formal notice but quietly resolved the complaint. Two more women came forward, though, in 2016, to report that Mr. Conforth had worked to engage them in sexual relationships when they were his students, and, in the midst of the university's investigation, he agreed to quietly leave his faculty position.  Now six former Michigan undergraduates -- the three women who previously complained and three others -- have filed court papers announcing their intention to sue him and the university, asserting he engaged in a litany of sexual misconduct and the school failed to protect them.  ''He should have been fired,'' said Isabelle Brourman, one of the women. ''But they allowed him to thrive. They allowed him to win awards.''  Ms. Brourman says, according to the court papers, that Mr. Conforth pressured her into a series of sexual encounters, some of them in his campus office, and later, after she had graduated, raped her in his Ann Arbor apartment.  A second former student, Ms. Brown, said she was pressured into a sexual encounter with Mr. Conforth after he told her he had feelings for her and pursued her for several weeks. A third woman said he aggressively kissed her. The other plaintiffs say Mr. Conforth propositioned them to have sexual relationships, at times sending them sexually-charged messages or emails and persisting even after they said no. One woman said he gave her a raccoon penis, suggesting it was a talisman.  Mr. Conforth declined to discuss the accusations. ''I've tried to move on with my life,'' he said in a brief phone conversation. ''This is a past issue.''  The university said it handled the 2008 complaint against Mr. Conforth appropriately and set firm restrictions on his behavior. When the subsequent complaints came in, it said it took swift action to investigate and that Mr. Conforth would have faced dismissal proceedings if he hadn't agreed to retire in early 2017.  ''You will note in the separation agreement that the university took immediate and lasting action to assure that Mr. Conforth would not be in any further contact with U-M students, even after his employment ended,'' a university spokesman said.  Sexual misconduct allegations at universities across the country have sparked calls for policies that hold faculty and student offenders accountable. Last year, Michigan fired David Daniels, an opera star and voice professor, after he and his husband were charged with sexually assaulting a singer.  Also last year, the university reached a $9.25 million settlement with women who accused Martin Philbert, then the school's provost, of sexual harassment.  The university said it is constantly working to improve its sexual misconduct policies in a statement that cited a number of changes it has made in recent years.  Mr. Conforth arrived at Michigan in 2001 with a doctorate in ethnomusicology from Indiana University and a résumé that included his work as the founding curator with the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame and Museum in Cleveland, which he left in 1993.  Since leaving Michigan, Mr. Conforth, 70, has co-written an award-winning biography of the blues singer and guitarist Robert Johnson and helped narrate a Netflix documentary about the musician.  While at Michigan, Mr. Conforth was so popular that students chose him as the winner of the ''Golden Apple'' teaching award in 2012.  But four years earlier, Katherine McMahan, a recent university graduate, had told the school about a disturbing incident the previous fall. Ms. McMahan, then 22, said she had attended a blues concert connected to Mr. Conforth's course and, at a bar after the concert, she said he cornered her outside the bathroom, put his hand around her waist, pulled her closer to him and asked her to come home with him to sleep over. She said she declined but that he persisted until she pushed him away. (Ms. McMahan is a new_york_times employee who works outside the newsroom.)  Ms. McMahan later received an email from a Michigan official that said the university was taking steps that ''it feels are likely to deter future behavior of this nature towards students.'' University records, obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request, show that after McMahan's complaint, the school had Mr. Conforth sign a ''Last Chance'' agreement, which stipulated requirements he would need to fulfill to avoid termination.  Other former students recount similar experiences, though they did not report them to the university. Cassie McQuater said that in 2007, when she was 20, Mr. Conforth, who was not her teacher and whom she had met only briefly, began sending her emails, declaring his love. In one, she said, he included an erotic drawing of a man and a woman with her name at the bottom. When she eventually agreed to get dinner with him, he asked her to return home with him; she declined.  Lauren Lambert, who said she plans to join the intended lawsuit, said that starting in 2011, while she was his student and afterward, Mr. Conforth sent her sexually charged messages, saying he had fantasies about her.  Two women said that as part of the effort to engage with them sexually, Mr. Conforth had employed the ruse of suggesting he was a member of the so-called ''Order of the Illuminati,'' a secret society whose mysteries were popularized in Dan Brown's novel ''Angels & Demons.'' The women, Ms. Brourman and her friend, Maya Crosman, said they believed he was responsible for emails they received, purportedly from Illuminati leadership, that recommended they engage in relationships with Mr. Conforth, whom the emails called the ''Chosen One.''  Ms. Crosman kept a copy of one of the emails -- sent from an email address designed to be anonymous -- in which a person who identified themselves as Grandmaster Setis recommends she return the ''intensely profound love'' that Mr. Conforth had for her.  The women said they thought Mr. Conforth had the potential to be a kind of spiritual and artistic mentor, but then things grew strange. In legal papers filed in a Michigan court, Ms. Brourman said Mr. Conforth invited them to an arboretum on campus where he engaged in a mysterious ritual that involved cutting off pieces of their hair and giving Ms. Brourman a series of objects, including the raccoon penis, seeds and some kind of medallion. She was warned to keep them with her, or there would be ''repercussions,'' the court papers said.  Both women said they received what appeared to be homemade horoscopes in which it was predicted they were romantically compatible with Mr. Conforth.  Ms. Crosman said Mr. Conforth inundated her with messages online, declaring his love. One included a Pablo Neruda poem that said, ''I crave your mouth, your voice, your hair.'' At the end of the semester, she said he forcibly kissed her and stuck his tongue in her mouth during a visit to his office.  The two women said they feared reporting their encounters to the university at the time.  ''We were trying to protect ourselves in ways where we didn't have to insult him, we didn't have to fight him,'' Ms. Crosman said.  The court papers say Brourman felt intimidated by the strange emails she received, including ones that directed her to ''service'' Mr. Conforth. In 2014, she said they had a sexual encounter in his office on campus. After that encounter, Ms. Brourman and Mr. Conforth met regularly for ''spiritual lessons'' that required sex beforehand, the papers said. Ms. Brourman said in an interview that at the time, she was confused and thought she might have feelings for Mr. Conforth, but in retrospect, she said she recognizes that she was being manipulated.  In fall 2017, after she had graduated, Ms. Brourman said in court papers that Mr. Conforth raped her at his apartment in Ann Arbor. She did not report it, she said, because she feared retaliation, but in February filed a complaint with the police.  The two women whose complaints played a role in Mr. Conforth's departure from Michigan approached the university after learning about each other's accounts. Shaina Mahler had been 22 in 2014 when she said Mr. Conforth, her favorite teacher, began sending her messages on Facebook. She was flattered at first, but then the messages escalated into expressions of how attracted he was to her.  When Ms. Mahler told him that she was starting to feel ''confused and anxious'' about his messages, Mr. Conforth apologized and said they could be friends, writing, ''Please please don't ruin my life here.'' But a few days later, Mr. Conforth sent her more sexually charged messages, saying he wanted to ''kiss'' and ''touch'' her, according to court papers.  Ms. Mahler let it slide until two years later, when she spoke with Ms. Brown, who recounted a nearly identical experience of being pursued by Mr. Conforth. Ms. Brown, then 21, told him several times his advances were ''inappropriate,'' according to notes taken by a Title IX coordinator who interviewed her. But one day in his office, when he insisted they hug, they ended up kissing too, she said.  That semester, their interactions escalated into a sexual encounter in his office, and Ms. Brown told the coordinator that, at first, she believed it was consensual. She acknowledged having feelings for Mr. Conforth but told the coordinator that she quickly became anxious and conflicted after their sexual encounter. She soon recognized, she said, that she had been manipulated, especially after learning from a friend -- another student in his class at the time -- that Mr. Conforth had left a note for her saying that he found her attractive.  Ms. Brown and Ms. Mahler reported their interactions with Mr. Conforth to the university at the end of 2016 and he retired shortly thereafter.  The university said its policy is to share the school's investigative findings with complainants and that it could not comment on individual cases. But both of the women said that the university did not alert them to the outcome of its review until last year, when Ms. Mahler said she checked in after hearing complaints from other women.  ''I let it go for a while,'' she said, ''but I always wondered.''  Sheelagh McNeill contributed research.  Maya Crosman, left, and Cassie McQuater are among those who say that Bruce Conforth sexually harassed them. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOYCE KIM FOR THE new_york_times) (C1); Top left, Bruce Conforth in a documentary about the musician Robert Johnson. Above, Katherine McMahan, left, and Isabelle Brourman accused Mr. Conforth of sexual misconduct while at the University of Michigan, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NETFLIX; KHOLOOD EID FOR THE new_york_times; ERIN KIRKLAND FOR THE new_york_times) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004g "
281		"    Her Arias, Performed With a Pen  By Corey Kilgannon  1,403 words 24 April 2021   1     ''To Lois.''  For many of opera's greatest stars since the 1950s, writing that phrase before signing an autograph was both a rite of passage and an honor. After they had finished a long performance at the Metropolitan Opera, singers like Beverly Sills, Luciano Pavarotti, Plácido Domingo and Renée Fleming knew that Lois Kirschenbaum would be waiting at the stage door to greet them. The artists admired her almost as much as vice versa.  Kirschenbaum was a switchboard operator from Flatbush, Brooklyn, who became perhaps New York's biggest and longest-standing opera buff -- and an obsessive autograph collector. For over half a century, she spent about 300 nights a year at the Met and other musical and dance performances. Legally blind since birth, she would usually sit in the uppermost balcony and follow the action with a pair of large binoculars, always hustling back after the curtain call -- programs and headshots in hand -- to gather signatures.  Until her death last month, at 88, she put her memorabilia in a spare bedroom of her rent-controlled East Village apartment, as it grew into perhaps the largest collection of its kind accumulated by a fan firsthand.  ''It's a musical time capsule of what went on in New York in classical music over 55 years,'' said Carl Halperin, a longtime friend. ''She didn't even know what was in there anymore -- it was just so much.''  Another friend, Sally Jo Sandelin, was in the apartment on a recent afternoon cleaning and sorting out Kirschenbaum's belongings. ''Lois didn't throw anything out,'' she said. ''And since she was at performances every night and working every day, and legally blind, the stuff just piled up.''  The spare bedroom had long ago become a knee-high wading pool of paper, said Sandelin, who several years back began packing it all, still unorganized, into dozens of boxes.  The collection is striking in both its abundance and haphazardness. Each box is itself a seemingly endless trove, covering minor singers and household names alike, their signatures scrawled across magazine articles, reviews and publicity shots. But programs, most of all, and mostly from the Met -- the pages listing each performance's cast covered with autographs. ''Plácido Domingo'' is regally wrought on a Feb. 22, 1982, ''La Bohème'' program; ''Luciano Pavarotti'' on a photograph is a meandering sine wave.  Kirschenbaum reigned as the grande dame of a group of hard-core fans who populated standing room at the opera house and would flock to the stage door for autographs. It was a practice that helped her befriend some of the world's most famous opera singers, who half-joked that they had truly arrived on the New York scene only after being approached by her after a performance. Her request for an autograph was considered ''a special type of approval,'' the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade said in an interview.  That approval came in large doses, as Kirschenbaum would often ask singers to sign stacks of items pulled from the oversize handbag she hefted, full of programs, photos, magazine clippings and other memorabilia. The soprano Aprile Millo recalled that Kirschenbaum might hand her 20 pieces at a time to sign.  Though a slightly built woman, she became known for charging like a linebacker to the front of the line for an autograph, that formidable handbag serving as a blocking device. Sandelin, herself a stage door fixture, said with a laugh, ''We all have bruises from that bag.''  If Kirschenbaum often secured dozens of autographs a night, simple arithmetic indicates she may have amassed more than 200,000 over the decades. Her will, drawn up in 1992, directed her collection to be left to the ''Lincoln Center Research Library,'' likely a reference to the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, said Elena Villafane, a lawyer representing Kirschenbaum's estate.  The branch's estimable opera collection includes the earliest known recordings of Met performances and rehearsals, and scores annotated by many great singers. Its executive director, Jennifer Schantz, said the library was ''delighted and honored,'' adding, ''We look forward to reviewing the collection and learning more.''  Since the library does not accept all such donations, however, Kirschenbaum's friends still fear the material might wind up discarded. ''No one wants paper these days,'' Halperin said. ''They want everything digitized.''  Kirschenbaum grew up in Brooklyn and became an opera enthusiast after her previous obsession, the Brooklyn Dodgers, decamped for Los Angeles in the late 1950s. Her first love was the radiant soprano Renata Tebaldi, then in her glory. After just a few years of attending performances nightly, Kirschenbaum had amassed thousands of autographs.  One reason she requested multiple signatures from singers was to buy herself time to ask them about their upcoming performances. She carefully compiled this information into detailed, typewritten schedules, making copies to distribute to other buffs hungry for advance word of what the Met and other companies were planning.  Those faded lists were in abundance among the autograph piles, many annotated by hand. Kirschenbaum would also often scrawl her own brief critiques of performances on her programs. After a May 6, 1964, Met performance of ''Aida,'' she noted that the soprano Birgit Nilsson was ''much improved from earlier'' in the leading role, and that the mezzo-soprano Rita Gorr was ''not in best voice but very exciting'' as Amneris.  Halperin reeled off a few treasures he recalled Kirschenbaum procuring that were likely buried somewhere in the boxes: A program signed by James Levine, the Met's longtime music director, after his 1971 debut conducting ''Tosca''; another from Beverly Sills's Met debut, in 1975; Maria Callas's autograph, secured after a late-career concert at Carnegie Hall in 1974. When Kirschenbaum turned 75, in 2007, a party was held for her that drew such stars as Fleming, Marilyn Horne and Levine, who gave her a baton and an autographed score of ''La Bohème.''  Her friends have speculated that Kirschenbaum's refusal to spend money on bins is one reason her collection remained so disorganized. She was a notoriously frugal woman who insisted on taking the bus and subway to and from Lincoln Center, even late at night and in snowstorms.  Rather than purchase tickets, she would canvas operagoers at the entrance for extras or ask Met staffers she knew to let her slip in. To avoid the Met's food prices, she would sneak in peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and a thermos of coffee.  In the end, though, it was clear that money was not a problem for her: Kirschenbaum died with around $2.5 million in savings, said Martin Hermann, the executor of her estate. She was an only child who never married or had children, and never spoke of any surviving family members. Her will calls for her money to go to three people and a variety of arts and other nonprofits.  But to the Met, the center of her universe for decades, she left nothing.  Halperin wondered if this related to a period, around the time Kirschenbaum created her will in the early 1990s, when she was banned from the Met's backstage and relegated to the stage door because of her overzealous pursuit of autographs.  ''That hurt her deeply,'' he said, adding that she pursued the autographs merely as ''an icebreaker: a way to gain access to the stars, which was like oxygen for her, to be basking in the glow of Pavarotti or Beverly Sills or Plácido Domingo.''  The signatures ''were souvenirs,'' Halperin said, ''of a wonderful night.''  The soprano Martina Arroyo, top left, signed a photograph of her and Lois Kirschenbaum, an opera buff who collected thousands of autographs from singers, including the mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne, left, and the tenor Flaviano Labò, far left. (C1); For decades, Lois Kirschenbaum, who died last month, spent most nights at the Metropolitan Opera and other musical and dance performance sites and collected boxes and boxes of memorabilia, which she stored in her East Village apartment, above. She became well known for collecting autographs from famous singers, including Plácido Domingo, top right, Sherrill Milnes, far left below, and Carol Vaness, near left. Kirschenbaum also collected signatures on posters, far left above, and compiled calendars of performances, top left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VINCENT TULLO FOR THE new_york_times) (C5)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004f "
282		"    Homebound and Waiting: Vaccine Push Misses Some Older New Yorkers  By Sharon Otterman  1,612 words 24 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     Efforts to vaccinate homebound seniors in New York have lagged, and the national pause on the Johnson & Johnson vaccine set them back further.  Antonia Laraki is homebound, with a leg badly swollen from lymphedema and a son with autism at home who relies on her. After applying for a citywide program in mid-March that vaccinates homebound people, she waited weeks just to hear when the city might be able to send someone to her apartment.  Finally, on Tuesday, she got the news: A team of vaccinators would be able to make it to her apartment the next day, with the Moderna shot. The city had been using Johnson & Johnson for the program, but after a national pause in administering that vaccine because of a rare blood clot disorder, some of its partners were able to pivot.  Still, the pause caused the cancellation of more than 1,000 appointments for homebound people, adding yet another hurdle to a program that has moved slowly.  ''I'm happy,'' said Mrs. Laraki, 75, on Friday, from her apartment in a Manhattan housing project. ''I feel relieved.''  While more than 2 million people are now fully vaccinated in New York City, the city's effort to vaccinate homebound seniors has lagged. Though there are an estimated 23,000 homebound seniors and other homebound adults who need shots, city teams had made 4,292 vaccination visits as of Friday.  The city did not begin its main homebound vaccine effort until March 1, in large part out of a desire to wait for the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, which planners knew would be logistically easier to use because it requires just one dose.  A committee of outside health experts on Friday recommended lifting the pause, and federal officials quickly did so. But the fear the pause generated has the potential to be a major setback to the program, which had finally ramped up and was reaching about 1,200 people per week.  ''We are in a time frame here that is frightening,'' said Gale Brewer, the Manhattan borough president, who has been leading a weekly task force meeting focused on the vaccine rollout. ''We are all trying to beat the variants, and with the home health aides going in and out, there is risk.''  The city is hopeful it will be able to soon restart the program fully and convince people the vaccine is safe.  ''As the primary provider of homebound vaccinations in the city, we remain undeterred in restarting the program to reach as many people as possible,'' said Avery Cohen, a spokeswoman for City Hall.  The hurdles facing homebound seniors reflect the broader issues that have shadowed the nation's vaccine drive in general. While nearly half of all New York City adults have already gotten at least one vaccine dose, roughly equal to the national average, the vaccine rollout has been most accessible to internet-savvy people who are mobile, and have time and energy to dedicate to getting vaccinated.  People who are frail, hesitant and not able to use the internet in English have been harder to reach. While 80 percent of people over age 65 have gotten at least one dose nationwide, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in New York City, that number drops to 61 percent. And people 85 and older have the lowest rates of vaccination among the city's seniors, with only 49 percent of New Yorkers in that age group having received at least one dose, according to city data.  The city said its vaccination rate for older residents overall was roughly on par with that of other cities, such as Los Angeles, where 70 percent of those over 65 had gotten a single dose. It pointed to the many other efforts it was using to reach seniors, from dozens of pop-up vaccine clinics in senior buildings to free transportation to vaccine sites.  Ms. Cohen noted that a total of 6,584 vaccinations had been completed through the program as of Friday, in part because on each visit, vaccinators may also give shots to others in the home who qualify. While the Johnson & Johnson pause had brought the program to a complete halt, within days, some of its providers had been able to start administering Moderna vaccines instead.  The city's main homebound vaccine effort, run by the Fire Department, is still hoping to return to using the Johnson & Johnson vaccine now that it has again been approved by federal regulators, officials said.  Each weekday morning before the pause, 30 teams of homebound vaccinators, each with a nurse, a data entry person and a driver, have been gathering at a South Brooklyn base before spreading out around the city to reach the homebound, said Rich DePrima, the fire department battalion chief coordinating the program.  George Rodriguez, 83, lives alone and is also homebound. He has not gotten vaccinated yet, but he will only agree to an injection if his beloved caseworker from the local community center is there to make him feel safe, he said. And ever since the national pause, he fears getting the Johnson & Johnson shot.  ''I only have him, he is my second half,'' he said of his caseworker, Albert Bencosme. ''I don't have nobody else. Just him and God.''  A travel nurse provider called Aya Healthcare has been supplying the nurses for the Fire Department's effort. The city has also begun contracting with other companies, including the Visiting Nurse Service of New York and Zeel, a tech-focused wellness company, in order to speed up vaccinations to thousands of people already on waiting lists. The Northwell Health and Mount Sinai hospital systems each have also made around 550 visits to people already receiving at-home care through their systems, they said.  But the city's vaccination program also has been hindered by red tape, Ms. Brewer and several community-based organizations working with older New Yorkers said.  People wishing to register for a homebound vaccine through the city must fill out an interest form. Then someone from the city is supposed to reach out to each senior to verify they are ''fully homebound,'' meaning that they cannot leave their home, even with assistance. Then, the representative can schedule a vaccination.  This multi-step process has proved difficult to navigate, and does not line up with the reality of many homebound New Yorkers, said Maria Muniz, program director at Casabe Houses for the Elderly, a subsidized senior building in East Harlem. There are about 30 homebound people in her building, she said, and she filled out a form for each of them. She then gave her office phone number for each, because her residents, many of whom do not speak English well and have health impairments, do not always answer their phones.  Vaccinators sometimes call in the evenings when her office is closed, or on the weekends, she said. They have not been leaving messages, or they want to speak to each resident individually.  ''Their response is really bad, I'm not getting anywhere,'' Ms. Muniz said.  She has started talking with a local community clinic to see if she can get them to visit her residents directly. One of her homebound residents, she said, is 99; two others are in their mid-90s.  Gregory J. Morris, the executive director of the Stanley M. Isaacs Neighborhood Center on East 93rd Street, said he has been frustrated that the city has not asked him for more help coordinating and communicating with the 1,000 homebound seniors his organization delivers meals to in East Harlem and the Upper East Side, including Mrs. Laraki and Mr. Rodriguez.  The senior center said Friday that many of their homebound clients were feeling isolated and confused.  ''We could shape the delivery process, be active in saying to people what's happening when. We can help them feel comfortable and safe when it happens,'' Mr. Morris said. ''And right now, I can't say what my role is except that I've been asked to send names into a void.''  Kathryn Haslanger, the chief executive of JASA, another organization that provides services for homebound seniors, said that of the 250 people the organization had referred for home vaccination, 60 had gotten vaccinated so far.  Ms. Cohen said that the city's initial list of homebound seniors had been compiled largely through case managers at the Department of Aging and Medicaid referrals, and that the city was now ''laser-focused'' on rescheduling those whose shots were canceled.  Instead of waiting, at least one nonprofit organization, the Bronx Rising Initiative, has decided to organize shots on its own. It has raised $500,000 from private donors to bring vaccinations to homebound residents in the Bronx, and is going door to door in housing projects and working with tenant organizations to find people, said Tomas Ramos, the organization's founder.  Working with a local clinic, VIP Community Services, the group had just started vaccinating with the Johnson & Johnson on April 12. It has since pivoted to the Moderna shot. Unlike the city, it is not requiring documentation or checking a senior's mobility level before scheduling at-home visits.  ''There are a lot of gaps when it comes to government,'' Mr. Ramos said. ''Because we are in the community, we solve the problem.''  Antonia Laraki, 75, is the primary caregiver for her son Hamid, 38, who has autism. It took the city weeks to set her up with a vaccine appointment. (PHOTOGRAPH BY James Estrin/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004e "
283		"    Acid Attack Leaves a Long Island Family Asking Why  By Mihir Zaveri  1,178 words 24 April 2021   16     Nafiah Ikram, 21, nearly died in the attack outside her Long Island home. The attacker is at large, and the motive remains a mystery.  Around 8 p.m. on a cool, cloudy March evening, Nafiah Ikram returned to her Long Island home after a 10-hour shift at a nearby CVS, where she worked as a pharmacy technician.  Ms. Ikram, 21, parked outside, and her mother, who had been in the passenger seat, rushed inside to use the restroom. Ms. Ikram lingered to retrieve some food from the back of the car.  Then her attacker struck.  Bursting out of the darkness, a man in a hood ran up to Ms. Ikram and threw a large cup filled with battery acid in her face before sprinting off. The acid seared one of Ms. Ikram's contact lenses to her eye. It ran down her throat as she screamed, singeing her lungs. Her family thinks her injuries would have killed her had her mother, a nurse practitioner, not moved her daughter quickly into the bathroom and doused her with water.  More than a month later, after several weeks in the hospital, Ms. Ikram still has painful burns and trouble eating. Doctors have warned that her eyesight may be compromised forever by the March 17 attack. No arrests have been made.  And her family lives in fear, wondering who would have attacked Ms. Ikram, a Hofstra University student, in what appeared to be an intentionally savage, calculated act that came out of nowhere.  ''I am lucky to be alive,'' Ms. Ikram said in an interview on Thursday. ''I think that the whole 'making sense of it' will come when hopefully the person that did this or the people that were behind this get caught. But right now, I am trying to just be O.K.''  Sheikh Ikram, Ms. Ikram's father, said he believed the authorities needed to put more resources into investigating the case.  ''We cannot relax,'' he said. ''We cannot even sit outside. We are mentally so disturbed.''  Commissioner Patrick J. Ryder of the Nassau County Police Department said in a statement that the attack at the home in Elmont, N.Y., a diverse suburb of about 36,000 people some 15 miles east of Manhattan, was a ''vicious and heinous crime.'' Part of the encounter was captured on a surveillance video, and the police are offering a $10,000 reward for further information leading to the arrest of the attacker or anyone else involved.  But in response to questions about the investigation, the police did not provide further information beyond a weeks-old statement describing the attack and the suspect, who they said was wearing gloves and a black sweatshirt.  The brutal and seemingly unprovoked attack on Ms. Ikram, who was born in the Bronx and is of Pakistani descent, came as Asian-Americans have in recent months been the victims of hate-fueled attacks in New York and across the nation. A mass shooting last month in the Atlanta area, which killed eight people, including six women of Asian descent, and another mass shooting this month in Indianapolis, where four of the eight victims were Sikh, have only stoked widespread fear of the deadly consequences of xenophobia.  This week, the New York chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, a leading civil rights group, called for the attack on Ms. Ikram to be investigated as a hate crime.  But Ms. Ikram and her father, who immigrated to the United States from Pakistan 30 years ago, said they did not believe it was racially motivated, in part because it seemed like the attacker waited specifically to target his daughter and not his wife.  A police spokeswoman said any decisions about whether the attack would be investigated as a hate crime would be made after an arrest took place.  Acid attacks occur worldwide, but are especially common in a few countries, including Pakistan, India, the United Kingdom and Uganda, according to the London-based Acid Survivors Trust International. The victims are disproportionately women, according to the group, and acid, which can disfigure someone for life, has traditionally been seen as a preferred weapon of vindictive men who accuse women of disloyalty or disobedience.  ''The fact that they went for my face is definitely personal,'' Ms. Ikram said.  The attack on Ms. Ikram began receiving more attention after the television host and author Padma Lakshmi posted about it on her Instagram page this week, asking people to donate to help pay for Ms. Ikram's medical bills and provide any information that could help the police find the attacker. Mr. Ikram, 50, works as a driver for Ms. Lakshmi, he said.  ''This is the nightmare of any parent, for this to happen to your child, to this innocent, young, promising girl, who has her whole life ahead of her,'' Ms. Lakshmi said in the Instagram post. ''I don't know who in the world would do this, with acid like this. I don't even know where you can get acid. I can't stop thinking about her.''  Ms. Ikram said her health had started to improve over the last few weeks. She is able to eat some soft food, but still struggles to keep it down.  She said doctors expected her skin to heal, but that her eyesight may not, leaving the family, which has lived in Elmont for 15 years, trying to speak with specialists who can help outline a path to recovery. Ms. Ikram is traumatized, her father said, and is scared to go anywhere by herself.  Mr. Ikram said a neighbor saw a red car parked near the home, possibly with three people inside, before the attack. He said his wife noticed the car parked there earlier that evening but did not think anything of it.  He said he wondered why the police had not been able to identify anyone associated with the car, or found more information about where the attackers might have fled, based on surveillance videos or traffic cameras.  ''I'm having a nightmare,'' Mr. Ikram said. ''I cannot focus on anything myself.'' His wife is not going to work because she has to take care of their daughter, he said.  For now, Ms. Ikram is not able to continue her studies at Hofstra. She said she hopes to become a doctor and work with children.  ''I feel like I'm not myself,'' she said. ''Everything I do, there's a tiny reminder of this incident. And I'm trying, instead of being sad about it, and wishing it didn't happen, I'm trying to look at the positives that come out of it, even though right now there are not that many.''  She added: ''Right now I say it could have been worse.''  Nafiah Ikram suffers from painful burns from the attack. ''The fact that they went for my face is definitely personal,'' she said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARA NAOMI LEWKOWICZ FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004c "
284		"    Rainbow Flag May Be Flown At Embassies, Blinken Says  By Pranshu Verma  506 words 24 April 2021   16     The action reversed a decision by the Trump administration, which rejected requests from embassies to raise it on their flag poles during the month of June, which in the United States and many other countries is Pride month.  Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken has authorized U.S. diplomatic missions across the world to fly the rainbow pride flag on the same pole as the American flag at embassies and consulates, according to a State Department cable reviewed by The new_york_times.  The action reversed a decision by the Trump administration, which rejected requests from embassies to raise it on their flag poles during the month of June, which in the United States and many other countries is Pride month.  According to the cable and a State Department official, Mr. Blinken authorized diplomats to fly the pride flag before May 17, which is the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia, and to continue their display at diplomatic outposts through the month of June.  In the cable, Mr. Blinken noted that it was not a requirement and gave chiefs of mission the ability to ''determine that such a display is appropriate in light of local conditions.''  During his confirmation hearing in January, Mr. Blinken told lawmakers he would support the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning people, including allowing the pride flag at U.S. embassies, appointing an L.G.B.T.Q. envoy, and rejecting the findings of a Trump administration ''Commission on Unalienable Rights'' which human rights scholars saw as a threat to L.G.B.T.Q. and abortion rights. An envoy is yet to be named.  During the Trump administration, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo blocked U.S. embassies from flying the Pride flag on the same pole as the U.S. flag, saying the American flag should fly alone.  Some embassies worked around the directive, including in South Korea, which displayed it on a building facade instead of the flagpole. Embassy officials in South Korea removed the banner, though, at the same time the Trump administration ordered it to remove a Black Lives Matter banner.  The decision to display the flag is unlikely to be met with controversy in countries where L.G.B.T.Q. rights are not an issue. But in regions such as the Middle East and North Africa, where many countries outlaw same-sex relationships, displaying the flag could be contentious.  In the cable, which was earlier reported by Foreign Policy, State Department officials were told that when making decisions at their outposts to support L.G.B.T.Q. rights, they should ensure that the policy of ''do no harm'' is followed in order to prevent a backlash against the local L.G.B.T.Q. population.  The pride flag can now be raised with the U.S. flag at U.S. diplomatic missions abroad, reversing a Trump-era prohibition. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DEMETRIUS FREEMAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004b "
285		"    Navalny Ends Hunger Strike After 3 Weeks In a Standoff  By Andrew E. Kramer  858 words 24 April 2021   12     The imprisoned opposition leader said he was responding to calls from his doctors and a belief that he had accomplished at least some of his goals.  MOSCOW -- Aleksei A. Navalny, the imprisoned Russian opposition leader, ended a three-week hunger strike on Friday that had embarrassed the Kremlin abroad and incited protests at home.  The 24-day hunger strike, which Mr. Navalny said had left him so skinny he looked like a ''skeleton, swaying, walking in its cell,'' became the latest battle in a yearslong, high-stakes competition between President Vladimir V. Putin and his most prominent domestic political opponent.  Mr. Putin refuses even to speak Mr. Navalny's name while the police and prosecutors harry his political organization with arrests and, this month, a move to ban it outright. Mr. Navalny is serving a prison sentence of more than two years for a parole violation of a conviction he says was politically motivated.  But even in prison he managed to confound Mr. Putin with a quandary: either concede to his demands for medical treatment by his personal doctors or risk creating a martyr.  Through the years Mr. Navalny has run a highly effective investigative unit that has embarrassed Mr. Putin and discredited his government with slickly produced videos exposing corruption at the highest ranks. He routinely refers to Mr. Putin's United Russia party as a gang of ''crooks and thieves.''  Mr. Navalny has also continued to set the agenda for the political opposition ahead of parliamentary elections scheduled for the fall. His organization turned out tens of thousands of street protesters on Wednesday, stealing some of the limelight from Mr. Putin's annual state of the nation address.  Mr. Navalny said he halted his hunger strike on the advice of his doctors and because his demands had been partially met.  He announced the hunger strike on March 31 to demand access for his personal doctors to treat health problems that possibly stemmed from his poisoning with a chemical weapon last year.  Mr. Navalny blamed the Russian government, saying that Novichok, a rare nerve agent only manufactured in Russia and the Soviet Union before it broke up, had been placed in his underwear in a hotel room last August. At the time, he was organizing his political group for local elections. The Kremlin denied any role in the poisoning.  Mr. Navalny was medically evacuated to Germany in a coma, recovered and returned to Russia in January, where he was arrested at the airport.  In prison, he reported back pain and numbness in his legs and arms. Earlier this month, tests showed signs of possible kidney failure that could lead to a lethal irregularity in Mr. Navalny's heartbeat, his doctors said.  Prison authorities never allowed access for Mr. Navalny's personal doctor. They did move him from his cell, first to a prison hospital then a civilian hospital, and this week allowed specialists to examine him.  ''Doctors whom I fully trust made a statement that we have achieved enough for me to stop my fast,'' Mr. Navalny said in a statement posted on his Instagram account on Friday. He said doctors had also advised him that if he continued the hunger strike, ''there will be nobody left to treat.''  Mr. Navalny said he also broke his fast because some supporters had announced hunger strikes in solidarity with him, and he did not want to risk their health.  Mr. Navalny's personal doctors issued a statement Thursday outlining the health care prison authorities had allowed after his transfer to a civilian hospital, including examinations by independent neurologists. The doctors said they had also received access to his test results, partially fulfilling the demands of the hunger strike.  The statement signed by Mr. Navalny's personal doctor, Anastasia Vasilyeva, and four specialists said they had not lifted their request to examine Mr. Navalny in person. But enough had been done, they said, to justify halting the strike.  The extended hunger strike, however risky for Mr. Navalny personally, has kept his case on the agenda of Western governments despite a Russian military buildup on the border with Ukraine.  The United States national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, this month said that the Russian government would face ''consequences if Mr. Navalny dies.'' Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian of France also expressed concern and put the Russian government on notice: ''There is a major responsibility here for President Putin,'' he said.  In domestic politics, Mr. Navalny's hunger strike and deteriorating health prompted street protests on Wednesday in cities across Russia.  The protests brought riot police officers out in force in Russian cities on a day when Mr. Putin intended to highlight in his state of the nation speech a hopeful message of economic growth as the country emerged from the coronavirus pandemic. By the end of the day, police had detained nearly 1,500 demonstrators nationwide.  The opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny at a court hearing in February in Moscow. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Kirill Kudryavtsev/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0004a "
286		"    When the 'Middle of the Chaos' Is Just Outside Your Window  By Ed Ou, Katie G. Nelson, Meg Felling, Shane O'Neill and Kassie Bracken  365 words 24 April 2021   14     A new_york_times Video team went inside the home of Ebonie McMillan, who lives across from the Brooklyn Center Police Department, near Minneapolis. Outside, protesters and law enforcement clashed over the fatal police shooting of Daunte Wright just miles away. Shots rang out, a voice on a megaphone urged dispersal, and smoke rose above the crowd. Inside, Ms. McMillan's 8-year-old, VaNese, helped corral Clarance and Autumn, both 2, in a bedroom. ''At first it was very traumatizing to hear all the booms and the bangs,'' said Ms. McMillan, whose visiting 19-year-old daughter Janae Burchette joined in the protests from the apartment balcony. ''You don't know if that's gunshots or -- people are outside getting injured. It's chaotic, but you are sitting in the middle of the chaos and you're just numb.'' Watch the full video at nytimes.com/video  EBONIE McMILLAN: 'All of the army tanks, I don't know what they're shooting in the air, but just to see their presence is -- if you could put all the money and time into what you're doing right now, you can put the money and time into fixing the problem.'  McMILLAN: 'Was this selfish for me to bring them into the world that we're living? What kind of future do they have? Is this what they have to look forward to?'  McMILLAN: 'The fact that she can dance and listen to music and twirl around is amazing to me when all this stuff is going on out there. I wish my mind was not where it is right now.'  JANAE BURCHETTE: 'My brother is only 2 right now. I don't want to ever see my brother on the news as one of these Black men getting murdered by them.'  McMILLAN: 'The police are pretty much calm during the day. The crowd is calm as well. But when it turns, like I want to say, maybe 7 or 8 o'clock, it gets a little aggressive.'  Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00049 "
287		"    A Writer Among Visual Artists  By Jonathan Griffin  1,806 words 24 April 2021   1     Her books are filled with insights into art world types and their relationships to the wider world.  LOS ANGELES -- At one point in Rachel Kushner's recently published novella, ''The Mayor of Leipzig,'' the narrator, an American artist, reveals: ''I personally know the author of this story you're reading. Because she thinks of herself as an art-world type, a hanger-on.''  This aside is typical of Kushner, both in its self-deprecating humor and its metafictional address. Kushner, however, is scarcely a hanger-on. While she is best known as the author of three widely acclaimed novels -- ''Telex from Cuba,'' ''The Flamethrowers'' and ''The Mars Room'' -- she has also written incisively about art and artists for magazines and journals including Artforum and BOMB.  She often features the art world in her fiction, too. ''The Flamethrowers'' describes, in part, the protagonist Reno's entree into the downtown art scene of 1970s New York (Reno sharing certain traits, such as a passion for motorcycles, with Kushner). It includes cameos from real artists, such as the sculptor John Chamberlain, mixed with invented ones in locations both historical -- Max's Kansas City, Andy Warhol's Factory -- and made up.  An anthology of her essays, ''The Hard Crowd,'' was published this month. Alongside tales of motorcycle racing, bartending in the Tenderloin neighborhood of San Francisco, and reflections on cult writers including Marguerite Duras, Denis Johnson and Clarice Lispector, the book includes essays on the artists Jeff Koons, Thomas Demand and Alex Brown. In another essay, ''Made to Burn,'' she reveals some of the art-historical inspirations for ''The Flamethrowers,'' such as Los Angeles artist Jack Goldstein's vinyl record of sound effects and the Italian photographer Gabriele Basilico's 1984 series ''Contact,'' showing the imprint of various designer chairs on a woman's bottom. (''The link between violence and modernism is everywhere but too broad to get into the form of a caption,'' she writes beneath the image.)  On the porch of her home in Angelino Heights here, Kushner, 52, spoke about her enduring interest in art and the individuals who make it. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.  What's in it for you, writing about visual art?  It's something of a natural affinity for me. I was always interested in art, even as a kid. I'm originally from Eugene, Ore., then we moved to San Francisco. But I was lucky enough to get to visit New York in the 1970s and '80s and be exposed to the art world there. My aunt, the media activist and artist DeeDee Halleck, made films with the Land artist Nancy Holt and Richard Serra, and was friends with the installation artist Gordon Matta-Clark. When I was about 5, I remember visiting the artists' Gate Hill Cooperative outside New York City, where DeeDee was living along with John Cage and the experimental filmmaker Stan VanDerBeek. A friend's mother worked for Donald Judd as his studio manager. So I got a glimpse of things.  What impression did that make on you?  I was interested in it not just for the work people were making but how they talked and how they lived and the way they performed their personalities, which seemed to me a component of what they do. The way they move toward their curiosity, stay interested in new things happening around them. I look to them, probably more than I look to other writers, for how to be an artist, how to recognize what's yours for the taking.  How did you first come to write about art?  When I moved to New York in the mid-90s, I worked at a now defunct magazine called Grand Street, where the legendary curator Walter Hopps [the founding director of the Menil Collection in Houston] was the art editor. I had aspirations to write a novel, but hadn't figured out how to do that yet. Writing about art was a simpler proposition for me. Jack Bankowsky, then editor of Artforum, invited me to write for that magazine. And, separately, my social life was pretty quickly all artists. I felt comfortable in that world.  In ''The Hard Crowd'' you describe this period of your life in your essay about the painter and musician Alex Brown.  I wrote that piece right after Alex died, in 2019. In writing it, I realized that Alex had introduced me to an entire milieu, one that influenced the direction of my life. When I moved to New York, I met Alex right away, then his gallerist, Hudson, who ran Feature Inc., which was a gallery of artists who pretty much all hung out together, such as Huma Bhabha, Jason Fox and Alexander Ross. Really smart people. Older than me. I loved to listen to them having these late-night discussions, and it was all kind of over my head, but it was absorbing.  It seems you mine art -- as well as film and literature -- as raw material for your fiction.  Yes, I do do that. People in novels can and should be able to upholster their realities with art and films from this one. Plus, I never like reading about made up works of art. It seldom works and tends to feel coy and phony. For example, in ''The Flamethrowers,'' the character Ronnie Fontaine claims to want to photograph every living person, which was what the conceptual artist Douglas Huebler said he wanted to do [for his 1971 ''Variable Piece #70 (In Process) Global'']. Or evocative details that I borrowed, like the artist and choreographer Yvonne Rainer removing thousands of pins from crevices in the floor of her SoHo loft, a former dress factory, with a magnet, in an era when artists were moving into former manufacturing spaces in New York.  Are there particular artists who have influenced you?  The filmmaker and artist James Benning is somebody I have grown quite close to, after he wrote me out the blue after he read ''The Flamethrowers.'' I was already thinking of his work, particularly the beautiful documentary he made in 2007, ''Casting a Glance,'' about Robert Smithson's ''Spiral Jetty.'' When I first watched his ''California Trilogy,'' I was just absolutely blown away by those films, and the way that he forces the viewer to sit with these long takes.  In 2018, I was at Scripps College as the Mary Routt Chair of Writing. As an assignment, I asked my students to come to the ''Skyspace'' installation they have on the Pomona campus by James Turrell. For two hours at sunset, we lay on cement benches and looked up at this rectangular cutout of sky. At one point, the sky started to vibrate, and the edges glowed violet and green.  Do you conflate looking and seeing and bearing witness? There's a big difference between looking at the sky and visiting the Shuafat Refugee Camp in East Jerusalem, as you do in ''We Are Orphans Here'' from ''The Hard Crowd.'' (That essay appeared in The new_york_times Magazine in 2016).  I'm hesitant about this concept of bearing witness, because it suggests that there's a social importance to simply that, to being on the scene. But I was drawn to Shuafat, and writing about a place that few outsiders have been to. I'm interested in the less and more visible elements of how a society organizes itself, and the way that people are sorted. I like to be immersed in worlds that are full of invisible codes that have to be teased out -- that have to be experienced directly, rather than through books.  In the new book, you credit the artist Richard Prince as an inspiration.  Richard has become a friend of mine. In ''The Flamethrowers,'' I included a character called John Dogg, which was Richard's alter ego early in his career. In my story he made different work. In the catalog for his 2007 Guggenheim retrospective, there was a great essay by Glenn O'Brien, which I loved because it was about humor and sensibility which, for me, really is what the art world is. You either get it or you don't. You just have to have the sense of play. Irony, too.  You have a lot of friends in the art world. Do you feel like an outsider?  Let's say I'm more of an independent agent than an outsider. A floater. Like I could just go from one social scene to another but don't have to be defined or limited by each one.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Are your readers floaters, too? It seems unlikely that many will be as familiar with Jeff Koons as Marguerite Duras or Denis Johnson.  I wanted to make it so even somebody who had never heard of Jeff Koons could hopefully read the essay and get something out of it.  I love the part about the 1975 video clip you found, in which a young, mustachioed Koons, not yet ''performing his man-child consumerism,'' as you write, sweatily interviews David Byrne. ''He wanted to be cool, and he was cool,'' you said of Koons.  He's the artist who is appreciated by people who are completely repulsed by and suspicious of the art world. I wanted to think about populism and in what way Koons is or isn't a populist artist, and in what way he's just kind of toying with populism.  One through line in the book seems to be this idea of being at the apex of your life, being ''finished with the new,'' and turning ''reflective, interior, to examine and sort and tally.''  I wanted to give the reader an experience of these different worlds that I've passed through and thought about. I think about something that was mentioned in the Peter Schjeldahl profile of my friend Laura Owens, the painter, from her diaries when she was young. Something like ''How to be an artist.'' One of her rules was ''contradict yourself constantly.'' I think that's totally amazing and insightful because it happens anyway. Cop to it, rather than always trying to present yourself as a seamlessly coherent narrative of mythology.  Above, Rachel Kushner at home in Los Angeles. A character in her book ''The Flamethrowers'' has the idea of photographing every living person, which comes from the Conceptual artist Douglas Huebler and is reflected in his 1975 work ''598/Variable Piece #70:1971 (In Process) Global 1975,'' below left. The artist Alex Brown, whose ''Girl'' (2017) is below right, influenced the direction of Kushner's life. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CLIFFORD PRINCE KING FOR THE new_york_times; ESTATE OF ALEX BROWN; DOUGLAS HUEBLER, VIA DARCY HUEBLER/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK; THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART) (C6)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00047 "
288		"    Why the Past Haunts Talks With Iran  By The Editorial Board  1,771 words 24 April 2021   22     For nuclear talks in Vienna to succeed, Iranians and Americans need to be more honest about their past actions.  Nuclear talks in Vienna aimed at bringing the United States and Iran back into compliance with the Iran nuclear deal, otherwise known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, are said to be making progress, which is good news. But there have been predictable roadblocks. Israel, which is not a party to the talks, appeared to sabotage Iran's centrifuges just as talks were gaining steam. Republicans in Congress are pushing a bill called the Maximum Pressure Act that would strip President Biden's ability to lift sanctions on Iran without a vote from Congress, making it impossible for the United States to live up to its end of any bargain.  Neither are likely to stymie the short-term prospects of a return to the deal. The G.O.P. doesn't have enough votes. But they are sobering reminders of the long-term reality. The Biden administration can strike a deal that buys time and stabilizes the situation -- and it should. But unless Israel and members of Congress get more assurances that Iran's nuclear program will be peaceful, the deal will always be at risk of unraveling under the pressure of Israeli attacks or new sanctions imposed by another American president.  That's why it is in Iran's long-term interests to bring more skeptics on board. One way Iran could do that is to clear up lingering questions about its past nuclear work. Iran has always insisted that its nuclear program is peaceful and civilian in nature. Iran's Bushehr reactor, the first nuclear power plant of its kind in the Middle East, began producing electricity in 2011 after years of struggle and Russian assistance. (The United Arab Emirates has also opened a nuclear power plant and Saudi Arabia says it plans to build 16 of them.)  Iranian diplomats say that longstanding American opposition to the completion of Bushehr -- and nearly any technological advancement or investment in Iran over the past four decades -- forced their civilian program to operate in shadows. Under the Iran nuclear deal struck in 2015, Iran took steps to assure the world that it would not develop weapons, including pouring cement into the core of a heavy-water reactor.  But Iran has never come clean about the weapons-related nuclear work it undertook before 2003, the year the C.I.A. estimates its nuclear weapons program was largely halted. In recent years, international inspectors have found traces of processed uranium at two sites that Iran never declared as nuclear facilities, adding to the list of unanswered questions that the International Atomic Energy Agency has to answer before being able to state with confidence that Iran isn't still harboring a secret weapons program. The agency's list of unanswered questions grew longer after Israeli spies stole a raft of documents from Iran revealing advanced development at undeclared sites. The stolen papers appear to document past activities, not current work. But the only way to know for sure is for Iran to let inspectors do their jobs.  If Iran's current nuclear program is truly aimed at civilian nuclear power, as its leaders claim, then Iran should answer the agency's questions with candor. The nuclear deal gives international inspectors access to every inch of Iran's nuclear fuel cycle. But it doesn't give unfettered access to military areas that weren't declared as nuclear sites.  The International Atomic Energy Agency knows what it looks like when a country renounces nuclear weapons. South Africa, which built at least six nuclear bombs despite heavy international sanctions, dismantled them quietly as international threats receded and leaders sought to shed their status as international pariahs. South Africa was given a clean bill of health only after inspectors verified that the program was in fact dismantled. Until Iran goes through a similar process, its civilian reactor will always operate under a cloud of deep suspicion. Its scientists will live with the threat of assassination and its economy will remain at risk from sanctions.  The United States also needs to acknowledge history and the ways in which its own policies have contributed to the current crisis. Iran's nuclear program dates back to the 1960s, when the United States supplied Iran with a nuclear research reactor. At the time, Iran was ruled by Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, a pro-American monarch who saw himself as a great modernizer. Mr. Pahlavi enthusiastically embraced the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which rests on a bargain: Countries that want peaceful nuclear power plants will be given access to technology, in exchange for robust inspections to ensure they are not producing weapons. Countries that already possessed nuclear weapons, for their part, agreed to pursue disarmament and eventually eliminate their nuclear arsenals, lest they hold an indefinite monopoly on the world's most powerful weapon. The treaty undoubtedly slowed the spread of nuclear weapons. No signatory has ever managed to build a bomb under international inspections. But there is little to stop a country from building nuclear weapons after announcing a withdrawal from the treaty and kicking inspectors out, as North Korea appears to have done.  In 1974, Iran unveiled an ambitious program to build 20 civilian nuclear reactors to prepare for the day when the country's oil reserves ran out, a plan U.S. officials commended at the time. In 1975, Mr. Pahlavi struck a deal with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to train the first cadre of Iranian nuclear scientists. Americans were supportive, but leery about letting Iran enrich uranium, a process that could be used to create fuel for a nuclear weapon. According to a new biography about Mr. Pahlavi, ''The Last Shah: America, Iran, and the Fall of the Pahlavi Dynasty,'' a letter to President Gerald Ford begging for enrichment technology went unanswered.  Mr. Pahlavi lent the French government more than a billion dollars to build a commercial enrichment facility in France to supply nuclear fuel to power plants in Iran, France, Italy, Belgium and Spain. But that consortium, known as Eurodif, never gave Iran the nuclear fuel. In 1979, religious revolutionaries overthrew Mr. Pahlavi. At first, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini declared nuclear power to be ''un-Islamic'' and withdrew from the project. Later, clerics had a change of heart and sought the fuel, but Eurodif refused to provide it. Eventually, Iran built its own uranium enrichment facility in secret.  Reports suggest that Iran's nuclear program was revived in 1984, after an invasion by Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader who had a nuclear weapons program of his own. The bloody eight-year war with Iraq killed at least 300,000 Iranians, including many who died horrible deaths from chemical weapons. But the international community sided with Saddam Hussein -- an outrage Iranians never forgot. It was during this war that the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps was formed. Iranian scientists like Mohsen Fakhrizadeh -- who was assassinated last year -- dedicated themselves to developing Iran's indigenous defenses.  After the Iran-Iraq war ended, a moderate president, Mohammad Khatami, was elected on promises to improve relations with the West. In 1995, Iran struck a deal with Conoco, a U.S. oil company, to develop one of its largest oil fields. But the Clinton administration killed the deal by banning nearly all American trade and investment in Iran, and threatening sanctions against foreign companies that invested there.  Iran's nuclear program inched forward anyway. In 2002, Iran's clandestine enrichment facility became international news. The international blowback, and the U.S. invasion of Iraq the following year, shook the Iranian regime. In 2003, Iran agreed to freeze its enrichment work and halted most weapons-related development. An Iranian official also prepared a sweeping proposal for U.S.-Iranian talks over a wide range of issues, including the nuclear program, Iran's posture toward American troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, and support for Palestinian terrorist groups. But the Bush administration scoffed at the idea of direct talks and signaled Iran might be next on its regime-change list. Two years later, Iranians elected a hard-liner, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, as president who pressed ahead with Iran's uranium enrichment program. By the end of Mr. Bush's second term in office, Iran was on its way to mastering enrichment.  Analysts disagree about why Iran has been willing to spend so heavily on a nuclear program that it claims is peaceful. Some view it as a matter of national pride. The more the Americans insisted that Iran should not have nuclear technology -- or even nuclear knowledge -- the more the nuclear program became a symbol of self-reliance and resistance to Western imperialism. Others see the program as Iran's only bargaining chip in the effort to remove sanctions, some of which have been in place for decades. Still others believe that the Iranian regime needs a nuclear weapon -- or at least the option of building one -- to survive domestic unrest and intense geopolitical rivalries. The grisly death of the Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi, who was overthrown with American help after he gave up his weapons program, serves as an unfortunate cautionary tale.  In 2015, the United States and Iran achieved a diplomatic breakthrough after the Obama administration conceded that Iran could enrich uranium on its own soil if it agreed to robust inspections and other measures to make sure its activities remained peaceful. The deal was flawed, but bought time to test the limits of diplomacy. But in 2018, President Donald Trump withdrew from the agreement, and slapped Iran with the most expansive sanctions to date, which have made it hard for ordinary Iranians to purchase medicine and food. As expansive as those sanctions are, they haven't stopped Iran from marching forward on its nuclear program. That suggests that external forces can slow Iran's program but not stop it. The only sure way to halt Iran's nuclear progress is to convince Iranians that they have more to gain from taking the path of South Africa than the path of North Korea.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times; RELAXFOTO.DE, VIA GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00045 "
289		"    Clashes Erupt Between Israelis and Palestinians Near Jerusalem's Old City  By Isabel Kershner  848 words 24 April 2021   12     The violence broke out as an extremist Jewish supremacy group marched in the city, chanting ''Death to Arabs.''  JERUSALEM -- Clashes between Israelis and Palestinians erupted overnight in Jerusalem as hundreds of supporters of an extremist Jewish supremacy group staged a march, chanting ''Death to Arabs,'' near the Old City.  The violence was the culmination of building tensions between Jews and Arabs in Jerusalem and elsewhere over the past couple weeks. Palestinian media reported that 78 Palestinians were injured and 15 of them were treated in hospitals. About 20 Israeli police officers and at least 16 Israeli civilians were hurt as well.  More than 50 people were arrested in the melee, both in predominantly Palestinian East Jerusalem and mostly Jewish West Jerusalem, according to the police. The city's mayor, Moshe Lion, said he had asked the police to ban the extremist group's demonstration but had been told that was impossible.  ''There is no doubt that it was superfluous,'' Mr. Lion told Kan, Israel's public radio. ''It did not add to the quiet that we need now.''  One of the main flash points of violence was the march by hundreds of mostly young, religious supporters of the Jewish supremacist organization Lehava. They had intended to confront young Palestinians who have been clashing nightly with police in the vicinity of the Old City.  The United States Embassy in Jerusalem said it was ''deeply concerned'' about the violence and called in a statement for ''responsible voices'' to urge an end to incitement and to restore calm in the city.  Israeli-Arab tensions have been on the rise since the start of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan about 10 days ago. Fueling the friction, Palestinian youths posted some clips on the video-sharing app TikTok in recent days showing attacks on religious Jews, including one being slapped in the face while riding the light rail in Jerusalem. Another had a drink thrown at him while walking in the Old City.  In the ancient port of Jaffa near Tel Aviv, an Orthodox Jewish man was beaten by Arab residents, setting off protests and clashes there this week.  In response, Jewish youths have been attacking Palestinians in downtown West Jerusalem, and Lehava called for Thursday night's march to restore Jewish ''honor.''  Palestinians had already been clashing with the Israeli police in East Jerusalem for several nights after the police prevented them from gathering on the steps in front of Damascus Gate, which form a kind of amphitheater at one entrance to the Old City. The steps have traditionally served as a festive meeting place for youths at night after the breaking of the daily fast during Ramadan.  Overnight between Thursday and Friday, hundreds of police officers, some mounted on horseback, created a buffer between the Jewish and Palestinian protesters, and both camps ended up clashing with the police, who dispersed the crowds with stun grenades and water cannons.  Jews and Palestinians then split off into gangs and roamed the streets on their respective sides of the city looking for potential victims.  On Friday, police formed a tight ring around Jerusalem's Old City, fearing further violence.  Israel annexed East Jerusalem after capturing it the 1967 Middle East war and claims sovereignty over the entire city. The Palestinians want East Jerusalem as the capital of a future state and most of the world considers it occupied territory.  Video clips circulating on social media overnight showed scenes of mob violence such as Palestinians fiercely beating a Jewish driver whose car had been set on fire and Jewish youths stoning a Palestinian home while children cried inside.  By noon on Friday, a tense calm prevailed in Jerusalem. The main evidence of the night's violence, besides the heavy police presence, were dozens of stones strewn along the roads, including a main thoroughfare that runs along the dividing line between East and West Jerusalem.  The mayor said that the violence had come after months of what he called exceptional cooperation between Jewish and Palestinian representatives in West and East Jerusalem in efforts to contain to the coronavirus pandemic.  Palestinian leaders blamed Jewish extremists and the Israeli government for the outburst of violence.  ''East Jerusalem is the eternal capital of Palestine and is a red line,'' the office of Mahmoud Abbas, president of the West Bank-based Palestinian Authority, said in a statement on Thursday.  Fatah, the mainstream Palestinian party that dominates the authority, praised the Palestinian residents of Jerusalem for defending the city and the Aqsa mosque, the revered Muslim holy site in the Old City, ''with their bare chests.''  Video images showed Palestinians pouring into the mosque for prayers on Friday chanting ''Allahu akbar,'' or God is Great, and ''Martyrs are marching to Jerusalem in their millions,'' a Palestinian rallying cry.  Myra Noveck contributed reporting.  Israeli security forces deployed outside the Damascus Gate in Jerusalem's Old City during the overnight clashes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mostafa Alkharouf/Anadolu Agency, via Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00046 "
290		"    France Opens Terror Query After Police Officer Is Killed In Town Southwest of Paris  By Aurelien Breeden  820 words 24 April 2021   13     The fatal stabbing of a policewoman at a station southwest of Paris was a fresh reminder of the constant terrorism threat in the country.  PARIS -- The French authorities opened a terrorism investigation on Friday after a knife-wielding assailant killed a police officer at a station about 25 miles southwest of Paris before being shot dead.  France is still on high alert for terrorism after a string of attacks last fall, and Jean Castex, the prime minister, and Gérald Darmanin, the interior minister, quickly rushed to the scene of the attack in Rambouillet, a quiet, affluent town.  ''She was a policewoman,'' President Emmanuel Macron wrote on Twitter after the attack, identifying the victim only as Stéphanie. ''We will yield nothing in the fight against Islamist terrorism,'' Mr. Macron added.  Mr. Castex told reporters that the officer, who carried out administrative duties at the station, had been ''cravenly'' killed in ''dramatic'' circumstances, but he did not elaborate.  Jean-François Ricard, France's top antiterrorism prosecutor, told reporters at the scene that his office had opened an investigation but provided few details, saying only that the assailant appeared to have scouted the area beforehand.  Mr. Ricard did not confirm French news reports that the attacker had shouted ''Allahu akbar,'' or ''God is great'' in Arabic, during the assault, saying only that the remarks he had made during the stabbing -- as well as the target and the weapon used -- pointed to a terrorist motive.  Linda Kebbab, a representative for Unité SGP Police Force Ouvrière, one of France's main police unions, said the victim was near the entrance to the police station shortly before 2:30 p.m. when the assailant stabbed her in the neck.  ''It's a terrible shock,'' Aurore Bergé, a lawmaker representing the Yvelines region, which is home to Rambouillet, for President Emmanuel Macron's party, said on Twitter.  France has been hit hard by dozens of terrorist attacks over the past decade. The most recent high-profile episodes came in October, when a history teacher was beheaded after showing cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad in a class on free speech in Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, and three people were stabbed to death at a basilica in Nice.  The stabbing on Friday took place as French lawmakers wrapped up work on a bill pushed by Mr. Macron's government to counter Islamist extremism in France. The attack is likely to further amplify the prominence of the issue during the presidential election campaign next year.  After a wave of large-scale attacks in 2015 and 2016 that killed hundreds, France has faced smaller spikes of Islamist terrorism perpetrated by isolated, self-radicalized individuals whom intelligence services have found hard to track.  ''Today we need to do a better job following the bottom of the spectrum: these individuals who are not perceived as the most dangerous, but who can take action without any forewarning,'' Mr. Macron told the newspaper Le Figaro this week.  Valérie Pécresse, a top regional official, said the assailant had struck at ''a symbol of France,'' a town in the countryside that she described as ''so peaceful.''  Ms. Pécresse said the police station in Rambouillet was well protected and that access inside was restricted. The attacker, she said, appeared to have waited for the victim to briefly exit the building.  French security forces have been often been targeted by terrorists.  In 2016, an Islamic State assailant fatally stabbed an off-duty police officer and his companion, a police employee, at their home. In 2017, a gunman killed a veteran police officer on the Champs-Élysées in Paris. And in 2019, in one of the worst attacks on the French police to date, a radicalized police employee stabbed four of his colleagues to death at the Paris police headquarters.  The attack on Friday was followed by widespread condemnation, especially among Mr. Macron's political opponents on the right and far-right, who have ramped up criticism of his security record before France's 2022 presidential elections and regularly blame him for doing too little to protect the police and being too soft on crime.  Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Rally party and Mr. Macron's main rival in next year's election, told the BFMTV news channel that Mr. Macron's administration was synonymous with ''chaos.''  ''The security situation in our country has never been so critical,'' Ms. Le Pen said. ''I wonder if France has become the country most affected by terrorism in Europe. Does it bother the government? I'm not even sure.''  Constant Méheut and Norimitsu Onishi contributed reporting.  Constant Méheut and Norimitsu Onishi contributed reporting.  A street blocked off near the police station in Rambouillet on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bertrand Guay/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00041 "
291		"    Vaccines From Troubled Site Were Shipped Out of U.S.  By Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Chris Hamby  1,283 words 24 April 2021   6     The Biden administration said it did not know of manufacturing problems at the Emergent factory when it approved shipping millions of doses of AstraZeneca's vaccine. The company says the doses were safe.  WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration said Friday that it did not know that a Baltimore factory had discarded millions of possibly contaminated doses of AstraZeneca's coronavirus vaccine when President Biden last month released the company to ship vaccines manufactured there to Mexico and Canada.  Canadian and Mexican officials said on Friday that they had assurances from AstraZeneca that the millions of doses they received were safe. Some of the doses have been distributed to the public in both countries, the officials said.  Biden administration officials said they had not vouched for the quality of the AstraZeneca vaccine doses made at the Baltimore plant, leaving the decision on whether to use them to the company and the Canadians and Mexicans themselves.  The administration, however, did inform the two countries of another episode of possible contamination, involving a similar vaccine developed by Johnson & Johnson, that occurred more recently at the same Baltimore plant.  Vaccine production at the plant, operated by Emergent BioSolutions, has been halted. Up to 15 million doses of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine needed to be discarded because of the contamination fears. This week, inspectors from the Food and Drug Administration said Emergent had failed to fully investigate the episode, and they also found fault with the plant's disinfection practices, size and design, handling of raw materials and training of workers.  The F.D.A. has informed regulators in other countries about its findings, according to an F.D.A. spokesman who also said the agency was ''providing additional information as requested'' and would ''continue to work closely with its international partners.''  The spokesman said that products not authorized for use in this country, like the AstraZeneca vaccine, ''may nonetheless be exported if certain conditions are met,'' but would not specify what those were.  Other administration officials, noting that AstraZeneca had not applied for emergency authorization of its vaccine in the United States, said it was up to the company and regulators in Canada and Mexico to determine whether the exports and the manufacturing facility were safe.  As news of the Emergent plant's troubles rippled across Canada and Mexico, leaders of both countries sought to reassure their citizens about the vaccines manufactured by the company. Shortly before he headed to a drugstore on Friday to receive a shot of the AstraZeneca vaccine, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada said he was confident that supplies sent by the United States were safe.  ''We have confirmed that the doses received from the United States a number of weeks ago are not, have not been subjected to the challenges that have come up currently in the Baltimore plant,'' Mr. Trudeau said at a news conference. ''There is absolutely no danger of that for Canadians.''  In Mexico, a senior government official said AstraZeneca had provided documentation indicating that the doses had passed quality tests and were not affected by issues at the Emergent factory. ''We are sure that the product that was applied to Mexican people was a safe, quality product,'' Mexico's coronavirus czar, Hugo López-Gatell, said at a briefing on Friday night.  The Biden administration's acknowledgment that it had been unaware of the discarding of the lots of AstraZeneca's vaccine, which The new_york_times reported occurred between October and January, underscores concerns about the government's oversight of a key contractor in the federal response to the pandemic. U.S. officials bet on Emergent to manufacture both the Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccines even as a series of audits identified serious quality shortcomings at the plant.  The F.D.A. has still not cleared the Emergent plant to release doses of either vaccine in the United States and has not indicated when, or whether, it will do so. While AstraZeneca's vaccine is not authorized for use in the United States, tens of millions of doses of it have been sitting idly at manufacturing plants.  The White House said last month that the federal government, which committed last year to buying 300 million doses from AstraZeneca, intended to ''loan'' 2.5 million doses to Mexico and 1.5 million doses to Canada. U.S. officials say the two countries were eager for the doses and have since expressed interest in getting more, especially because of a recent drop in supplies from India, another major supplier of vaccine.  Canadian officials, however, said on Friday that the nation's own regulators were reviewing the recent F.D.A. report on its inspection of the Baltimore facility, which ''will inform whether additional measures are required to ensure the safety of future supply.''  Emergent is a longtime government contractor that has virtually cornered a lucrative market in federal spending on biodefense. The Times reported last month that sales of its anthrax vaccines to the Strategic National Stockpile accounted for nearly half of the stockpile's half-billion-dollar annual budget throughout most of the last decade, leaving the federal government with less money to buy supplies needed in a pandemic.  The government awarded the company a $163 million contract in 2012 to ready the Baltimore facility to mass-produce vaccines in response to a pandemic. Last June, the Trump administration awarded the company a $628 million contract, mostly to reserve space at the Baltimore plant.  But The Times earlier this month documented a string of problems at the plant, many of which were known to federal officials.  Shortly after the contract was awarded to Emergent last June, a top federal pandemic official warned that the Baltimore plant lacked enough trained staff members and had a record of problems with quality control. A copy of the official's assessment cited ''key risks'' in relying on Emergent to handle the production of the vaccines.  The Times also reported that Emergent had discarded AstraZeneca's vaccine -- five lots in all, each the equivalent of two million to three million doses -- because of contamination or suspected contamination, according to internal logs, a government official and a former company supervisor.  A senior federal health official, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the matter, said Friday that the White House and senior leaders at the Department of Health and Human Services learned of the discarded AstraZeneca lots only after the Times report.  Last month, The Times reported that workers at the Emergent plant in Baltimore had conflated ingredients of the two vaccines, ruining up to 15 million doses of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine. Federal officials ordered major changes to the plant after those revelations.  The Biden administration ordered Emergent to stop making the AstraZeneca vaccine, and put Johnson & Johnson in charge of running the facility.  In a statement late Thursday, AstraZeneca said that the doses delivered to Mexico and Canada ''met the stringent requirements we are required to follow,'' and that ''required safety tests and quality control measures'' were conducted at each step of the production process and before the batches were released.  In the statement, which was reported earlier by CBS News, AstraZeneca said, ''The quality information from the manufacturing plants involved was properly submitted to the relevant regulatory agencies in each country to support authorization and approval of shipments from this supply chain.''  Ian Austen, Natalie Kitroeff and Oscar Lopez contributed reporting.  Vaccine production at the Emergent BioSolutions plant in Baltimore was halted after doses had to be discarded. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LO SCALZO/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o00040 "
292		"    Cryptocurrency Fraud Inquiry in Turkey  By Jack Ewing  470 words 24 April 2021   3     A cryptocurrency exchange in Turkey suspended operations this week amid accusations of fraud, freezing an estimated $2 billion in investors' money, and authorities said they were seeking the company's founder.  The Turkish authorities raided offices in Istanbul associated with Thodex, a cryptocurrency trading platform, on Friday morning and arrested more than 60 people, the private news agency Demiroren reported.  Thodex's 27-year-old founder, Faruk Fatih Ozer, left Turkey for Albania on Tuesday, the Turkish authorities said, who added that they were seeking his extradition.  The cryptocurrency firm has nearly 400,000 active users, whose accounts were nominally worth a total of $2 billion, according to Oguz Evren Kilic, a lawyer in Ankara who is representing Thodex investors. If their money has vanished, the losses will add another element of instability to Turkey's already shaky economy.  Living standards in Turkey suffer from double-digit inflation and a wobbly currency. Though cryptocurrencies are inherently risky, many Turks have turned to them as a way to protect their savings as the Turkish lira lost more than one-quarter of its value against the dollar in the last year.  Last week, Turkey's central bank banned the use of cryptocurrencies for purchases, citing the ''significant risks.''  Thodex promoted itself with ads that featured female Turkish celebrities dressed in bright red outfits and draped over a highly polished black automobile.  ''For sure the economic situation has an affect on this,'' Mr. Kilic, the lawyer, said in an interview. ''In such times of crisis, people want to diminish the loss of value of the assets they have.''  The sagging lira has raised the cost of imported goods and fueled inflation, leading to a steady erosion in living standards. In March, the annual rate of inflation was 16 percent, according to official figures, which many economists say understate the true rate.  In a statement on Thodex's website, Mr. Ozer, the founder, insisted that he had left the country merely to consult with foreign investors and would return. He said the accusations were a ''smear campaign'' and blamed the shutdown of the trading platform on a cyberattack.  Thodex ''has not victimized anyone,'' he said, adding that only about 30,000 accounts ''have a suspicious situation.''  Mr. Kilic noted that none of Thodex's customers could gain access to their accounts. ''If you cannot access the account, then you are a victim,'' he said.  On Twitter, people reacted to a statement from Thodex with crying face emojis. ''There are people who trust and invest everything in you,'' one user wrote.  A Bitcoin A.T.M. in an Istanbul shopping mall. Many Turks have turned to cryptocurrencies as a hedge against inflation. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Chris McGrath/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003z "
293		"    Relief Program For Live Events Re-Rescheduled  By Stacy Cowley  477 words 24 April 2021   5     Music club operators, theater owners and others in the live-event market have been waiting nearly four months for a $16 billion federal grant fund for their industry to start taking applications. Their hopes were briefly raised two weeks ago when the program's application website opened, then dashed as a technical malfunction prevented the site from accepting any applications.  Now, the Small Business Administration, the federal agency that runs the program, plans to try again on Monday at noon -- but only after one last round of confusion and frustration.  Late Thursday, the agency announced that it would reopen its application system for the Shuttered Venue Operators Grant on Saturday. After heavy pushback from angry applicants -- especially Jewish business owners who do not use electronics on Saturdays in observation of the Sabbath -- the agency changed course Friday night and rescheduled the reopening for Monday.  ''We understand the challenges a weekend opening would bring, and to ensure the greatest number of businesses can apply for these funds, we decided to reschedule,'' the agency said in a statement. ''We remain committed to delivering economic aid to this hard-hit sector quickly and efficiently.''  The money will be awarded on a first-come-first-served basis and is widely expected to run out fast. That means many applicants will feel pressure to submit paperwork as soon as the application system opens -- even if it is at an inconvenient time.  Applicants were generally relieved by the shift to Monday, but annoyed by the whiplash.  ''It's been a mess on so many levels. I feel like they're torturing us,'' said Dani Zoldan, the owner of Stand Up NY, a comedy club in Manhattan. Mr. Zoldan is Jewish and had been vocal on Twitter about the obstacles of a Saturday start.  The National Independent Venue Association, an industry group that lobbied for the relief fund, said it endorsed the decision to postpone the start.  ''While we're all anxious to apply as soon as possible, we support the S.B.A.'s decision to reopen the portal Monday and encourage a fair and equitable process for all,'' said Audrey Fix Schaefer, a spokeswoman for the group. ''The S.B.A. has responded to our desperate need and we're grateful for that.''  The Small Business Administration is also preparing to open a second grant program, the Restaurant Revitalization Fund, which is a $28.6 billion support fund for bars, restaurants and food trucks. That program is planning a seven-day test to help the agency avoid the kind of technical problems that plagued the venue program.  Technical glitches marred the Small Business Association's first attempt at accepting applications for the grant program. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Zack Wittman for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003y "
294		"    Push Is On to Fix Money Market Funds  By Jeanna Smialek  1,565 words 24 April 2021   1     In March 2020, the Federal Reserve had to step in to save the mutual funds, which seem safe until there's a crisis. Regulation may be coming.  The Federal Reserve swooped in to save money market mutual funds for the second time in 12 years in March 2020, exposing regulatory shortfalls that persisted even after the 2008 financial crisis. Now, the savings vehicles could be headed for a more serious overhaul.  The Securities and Exchange Commission in February requested comment on a government report that singled out money market funds as a financial vulnerability -- an important first step toward revamping the investment vehicles, which households and corporations alike use to eke out higher returns on their cashlike savings.  Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen has repeatedly suggested that the funds need to be fixed, and authorities in the United States and around the world have agreed that they were an important part of what went wrong when markets melted down a year ago.  The reason: The funds, which contain a wide variety of holdings like short-term corporate debt and municipal debt, are deeply interlinked with the broader financial system. Consumers expect to get their cash back rapidly in times of trouble. In March last year, the funds helped push the financial system closer to a collapse as they dumped their holdings in an effort to return cash to nervous investors.  ''Last March, we saw evidence of how these vulnerabilities'' in financial players that aren't traditional banks ''can take the existing stress in the financial system and amplify it,'' Ms. Yellen said last month at her first Financial Stability Oversight Council meeting as Treasury secretary. ''It is encouraging that regulators are considering substantive reform options for money market mutual funds, and I support the S.E.C.'s efforts to strengthen short-term funding markets.''  But there are questions about whether the political will to overhaul the fragile investments will be up to the complicated task. Regulators were aware that efforts to fix vulnerabilities in money funds had fallen short after the 2008 financial crisis, but industry lobbying prevented more aggressive action. And this time, the push will not be riding on a wave of popular anger toward Wall Street. Much of the public may be unaware that the financial system tiptoed on the brink of disaster in 2020, because swift Fed actions averted protracted pain.  Division lines are already forming, based on comments provided to the S.E.C. The industry used its submissions to dispute the depth of problems and warn against hasty action. At least one firm argued that the money market funds in question didn't actually experience runs in March 2020. Those in favor of changes argued that something must be done to prevent an inevitable and costly repeat.  ''Short-term financing markets have been driven by a widespread perception that money funds are safe, making it almost inevitable the federal government provides rescue facilities when trouble hits,'' said Paul Tucker, chair of the Systemic Risk Council, a group focused on global financial stability, in a statement accompanying the council's comment letter this month. ''Something has to change.''  Ian Katz, an analyst at Capital Alpha, predicted that an S.E.C. rule proposal might be out by the end of the year but said, ''There's a real chance that this gets bogged down in debate.''  While the potential scope for a regulatory overhaul is uncertain, there is bipartisan agreement that something needs to change. As the coronavirus pandemic began to cause panic, investors in money market funds that hold private-sector debt started trying to pull their cash out, even as funds that hold short-term government debt saw historic inflows of money.  That March, $125 billion was taken out of U.S. prime money market funds -- which invest in short-term company debt, called commercial paper, among other things -- or 11 percent of their assets under management, according to the Financial Stability Board, which is led by the Fed's vice chair for supervision, Randal K. Quarles.  One type of fund in particular drove the retreat. Redemptions from publicly offered prime funds aimed at institutional investors (think hedge funds, insurance companies and pension funds) were huge, totaling 30 percent of managed assets.  The reason seems to have its roots, paradoxically, in rules that were imposed after the 2008 financial crisis with the aim of preventing investors from withdrawing money from a struggling fund en masse. Regulators let funds impose restrictions, known as gates, which can temporarily prohibit redemptions once a fund's easy-to-sell assets fall below a certain threshold.  Investors, possibly hoping to get their money out before the gates clamped down, rushed to redeem shares.  The fallout was immense, according to several regulatory body reviews. As money funds tried to free up cash to return to investors, they stopped lending the money that companies needed to keep up with payroll and pay their utility bills. According to a working group report completed under former Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, money funds cut their commercial paper holdings by enough to account for 74 percent of the $48 billion decline in paper outstanding between March 10 and March 24, 2020.  As the funds pulled back from various markets, short-term borrowing costs jumped across the board, both in America and abroad.  ''The disruptions reverberated globally, given that non-U.S. firms and banks rely heavily on these markets, contributing to a global shortage of U.S. dollar liquidity,'' according to an assessment by the Bank for International Settlements.  The Fed jumped in to fix things before they turned disastrous.  It rolled out huge infusions of short-term funding for financial institutions, set up a program to buy up commercial paper and re-established a program to backstop money market funds. It tried out new backstops for municipal debt, and set up programs to funnel dollars to foreign central banks. Conditions calmed.  But Ms. Yellen is among the many officials to voice dismay over money market funds' role in the risky financial drama.  ''That was top of F.S.O.C.'s to-do list when it was formed in 2010,'' Ms. Yellen said on a panel in June, referring to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, a cross-agency body that was set up to try to fill in regulatory cracks. But, she noted, ''it was incredibly difficult'' for the council to persuade the Securities and Exchange Commission ''to address systemic risks in these funds.''  Ms. Yellen, who is chair of the council as Treasury secretary, said the problem was that it did not have activity regulation powers of its own. She noted that many economists thought the gates would cause problems -- just as they seem to have done.  Of particular concern is whether investors and fund sponsors may become convinced that, since the government has saved floundering money market funds twice, it will do so again in the future.  The Trump-era working group suggested a variety of fixes. Some would revise when gates and fees kicked in, while another would create a private-sector backstop. That would essentially admit that the funds might encounter problems, but try to ensure that government money wasn't at stake.  If history is any guide, pushing through changes is not likely to be an easy task.  Back in 2012, the effort included a President's Working Group report, a comment process, a round table and S.E.C. staff proposals. But those plans were scrapped after three of five S.E.C. commissioners signaled that they would not support them.  ''The issue is too important to investors, to our economy and to taxpayers to put our head in the sand and wish it away,'' Mary Schapiro, then the chair of the S.E.C., said in August 2012, after her fellow commissioners made their opposition known.  In 2014, rules that instituted fees, gates and floating values for institutional funds invested in corporate paper were approved in a narrow vote under a new S.E.C. head, Mary Jo White.  Kara M. Stein, a commissioner who took issue with the final version, argued in 2014 that sophisticated investors would be able to sense trouble brewing and move to withdraw their money before the delays were imposed -- exactly what seems to have happened in March 2020.  ''Those reforms were known to be insufficient,'' Ben S. Bernanke, a former Fed chair, said at an event on Jan. 3.  The question now is whether better changes are possible, or whether the industry will fight back again. While asking a question at a hearing this year, Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican from Pennsylvania and chair of the Banking Committee, volunteered a statement minimizing the funds' role.  ''I would point out that money market funds have been remarkably stable and successful,'' Mr. Toomey said.  Alan Rappeport contributed reporting.  Alan Rappeport contributed reporting.  As the pandemic took hold in March 2020, investors in money market mutual funds started trying to pull their cash out, creating a crisis. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASHLEY GILBERTSON FOR THE new_york_times) (B1); A primary concern is that investors will expect the Federal Reserve to save money market funds in the future, as it has in the past. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEFANI REYNOLDS FOR THE new_york_times) (B4)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003v "
295		"    Biden Gambles Big to Bridge Wealth Gap  By Jeanna Smialek and Jim Tankersley  1,819 words 24 April 2021   1     The Biden administration is relying on Congress instead of just the Fed to fix the economy. That mix could lead to a less wealth-unequal future.  The coronavirus pandemic has threatened to rapidly expand yawning gaps between the rich and the poor, throwing lower-earning service workers out of jobs, costing them income, and limiting their ability to build wealth. But by betting on big government spending to pull the economy back from the brink, United States policymakers could limit that fallout.  The $1.9 trillion economic aid package President Biden signed into law last month includes a wide range of programs with the potential to help poor and middle-class Americans to supplement lost income and save money. That includes monthly payments to parents, relief for renters and help with student loans.  Now, the administration is rolling out additional plans that would go even further, including a $2.3 trillion infrastructure package and about $1.5 trillion in spending and tax credits to support the labor force by investing in child care, paid leave, universal prekindergarten and free community college. The measures are explicitly meant to help left-behind workers and communities of color who have faced systemic racism and entrenched disadvantages -- and they would be funded, in part, by taxes on the rich.  Forecasters predict that the government spending -- even just what has been passed so far -- will fuel what could be the fastest annual economic growth in a generation this year and next, as the country recovers and the economy reopens from the coronavirus pandemic. By jump-starting the economy from the bottom and middle, the response could make sure the pandemic rebound is more equitable than it would be without a proactive government response, analysts said.  That is a big change from the wake of the 2007 to 2009 recession. Then, Congress and the White House passed an $800 billion stimulus bill, which many researchers have concluded did not do enough to fill the hole the recession left in economic activity. Lawmakers instead relied on the Federal Reserve's cheap-money policies to coax the United States' economy back from the brink. What ensued was a halting recovery marked by climbing wealth inequality as workers struggled to find jobs while the stock market soared.  ''Monetary policy is a very aggregated policy tool -- it's a very important economic policy tool, but it's at a very aggregated level -- whereas fiscal policy can be more targeted,'' said Cecilia Rouse, who oversees the White House Council of Economic Advisers. In the pandemic crisis, which disproportionately hurt women of all races and men of color, she said, ''If we tailor the relief to those who are most affected, we are going to be addressing racial and ethnic gaps.''  From its first days, the pandemic set the stage for a K-shaped economy, one in which the rich worked from home without much income disruption as poorer people struggled. Workers in low-paying service jobs were far more likely to lose jobs, and among racial groups, Black people have experienced a much slower labor market rebound than their white counterparts. Globally, the downturn probably put 50 million people who otherwise would have qualified as middle class into lower income levels, based on one recent Pew Research analysis.  But data suggest the U.S. policy response -- including relief legislation that passed last year under the Trump administration -- has helped mitigate the pain.  ''The CARES Act to the American Rescue Plan have helped to support more households than I would have imagined,'' Charles Evans, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, told reporters this month during a call, referring to the pandemic relief packages passed in early 2020 and early 2021.  Wealth has recovered nearly across the board after slumping early last year, foreclosures have remained low, and household consumption has been shored up by repeated stimulus checks.  While the era has been fraught with uncertainty and people have slipped through the cracks, this downturn looks very different for poorer Americans than the post-financial crisis period. That recession ended in 2009, and America's wealthiest households recovered precrisis wealth levels by 2012, while it took until 2017 for the poorest to do the same.  The government's policy response is driving the difference. In the 2010s, Republicans cited deficit worries and curtailed spending early, at a time when the economy remained far from healed after the worst downturn since the Great Depression. Interest rates were already near zero and not offering much of an economic lift, so the Fed engaged in several rounds of large-scale bond purchases to try to bolster the economy.  The Fed policies did help. But low rates and huge bond-buying bolstered the economy slowly, and by first increasing prices on financial assets, which rich households are much more likely to own. As companies gain access to cheap capital to expand and hire, the workers who secure those new jobs have more money to spend, and a happy cycle unfolds.  By 2019, that prosperous loop had kicked into gear and unemployment had dropped to half-century lows. Black and Hispanic as well as less-educated workers were working in greater numbers, and wages at the bottom of the income distribution had begun to steadily climb.  Poverty fell, and there were reasons to hope that if that had continued, income inequality -- the gap between how much the poor and the rich earn each year -- might soon decline. Lower income inequality could, in theory, lead to lower wealth inequality over time, as households have the wherewithal to save more evenly.  But getting there took nearly a decade and when the pandemic hit in 2020, it almost certainly disrupted the trend. The data are released on a lag.  As those divergent trends between labor and capital played out, the rich rebuilt their savings -- which are heavily invested in stocks and businesses -- much faster. Poorer households eventually reaped benefits as the years wore on and people landed jobs. The bottom half of America's wealth holders ended up better off than they had been before the crisis, but farther behind the rich.  At the start of 2007, the bottom half of the wealth distribution held 2.1 percent of the nation's riches, compared to 29.7 percent for the top 1 percent. By the start of 2020, the bottom half had 1.8 percent, while the top 1 percent held 31 percent.  Researchers debate whether monetary policy actually worsens wealth divides in the long run -- especially since there's the hairy question of what would have happened had the Fed not acted -- but monetary policymakers generally agree that their policies can't stop a pre-existing trend toward ever-worse wealth inequality.  By offering a more targeted boost from the very start of the recovery, fiscal policy can. Or, at a minimum, it can prevent wealth gaps from deepening so much.  Monetary policy ''is naturally trickle-down,'' said Joseph Stiglitz, an economist at Columbia and Nobel laureate. ''Fiscal policy can work from the bottom and middle up.''  That's what the Biden administration is gambling on. Paired with packages from December and last April, Congress's recent package will bring the amount of economic relief that Congress has approved during the pandemic to more than $5 trillion. That dwarfs the amount spent in the last recovery.  The legislation is a mosaic of tax credits, stimulus checks and small-business support that could leave families at the lower end of the income and savings distribution with more money in the bank and, if its provisions work as advertised, with a better chance of returning to work early in the recovery.  There is no guarantee Mr. Biden's broader economic proposals, totaling about $4 trillion, will clear a narrowly divided Congress. Republicans have balked at his plans and this week offered a counterproposal on infrastructure that is only a fraction the size of what Mr. Biden wants to spend. A bipartisan group of House moderates is pushing the president to finance infrastructure spending through an increased gas tax or something similar, which hits the poor harder than the rich.  Still, the president's new proposals could have long-term effects, working to retool workers' skills and lift communities of color in hopes of putting the economy on more equal footing. The president is set to outline his so-called American Family Plan, which is focused on the work force, before his first address to a joint session of Congress next week.  While details have yet to be finished, programs like universal prekindergarten, expanded subsidies for child care and a national paid leave program would be paid for partly by raising taxes on investors and rich Americans. That could also affect the wealth distribution, shuffling savings from the rich to the poor.  The plan, which must win support in a Congress where Democrats have just a narrow margin, would raise the top marginal income tax rate to 39.6 percent from 37 percent, and raise taxes on capital gains -- the proceeds of selling an asset, like a stock -- for people making more than $1 million to 39.6 percent from 20 percent. Counting in an Obamacare-related tax, the taxes they pay on profits would rise above 43 percent.  The new policies will not necessarily cut wealth inequality, which has been on an inexorable upward march for decades, but they could keep poorer households from falling behind by as much as they would have otherwise.  Betting big on fiscal policy to return the economy to strength is a gamble. If the economy overheats, as some prominent economists have warned it could, the Fed might have to rapidly lift interest rates to cool things down. Rapid adjustments have historically caused recessions, which consistently throw vulnerable groups out of jobs first.  But administration officials have repeatedly said the bigger risk is underdoing it, leaving millions on the labor market's sidelines to struggle through another tepid recovery. And they say the spending provisions in both the rescue package and the infrastructure could help to fix longstanding divides along racial and gender lines.  ''We think of investment in racial equity, and equity in general, as good policy, period, and integral to all the work we do,'' Catherine Lhamon, a deputy director of the Domestic Policy Council, said in an interview.  Times Square in February, above, and at a food bank in Phoenix in March. The $1.9 trillion relief package signed into law includes a range of programs that could help middle-class and poor Americans. Economic analysts predict the government spending will fuel growth this year and next, as the nation reopens and recovers from the pandemic. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN TAGGART FOR THE new_york_times; JUAN ARREDONDO FOR THE new_york_times) (B4)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003u "
296		"    Kathie Coblentz, 73, Librarian and Polymath  By Sam Roberts  860 words 24 April 2021   10     A Yankees fan, marathon runner, cinephile, editor, and, yes, a cataloger, she was the New York Public Library's third-longest serving employee.  Kathie Coblentz, a Renaissance woman who read or spoke 13 languages; collaborated on books about the directors Woody Allen, Clint Eastwood and Alfred Hitchcock; and, during her day job, cataloged rare books for more than 50 years at The New York Public Library, died on April 3 at a hospital in Manhattan. She was 73.  She was apparently grazed by a car pulling out of an underground garage as she was walking home to her apartment on West 58th Street, fell and hit her head and never regained consciousness, her friend and former colleague Jane Greenlaw said.  In that home, of 900 square feet, were some 3,600 books of her own, all having served as inspiration in her writing ''The New York Public Library Guide to Organizing a Home Library'' (2003).  Ms. Coblentz was recruited for a library job in 1969 even before she graduated from the University of Michigan, said Anthony W. Marx, the library's president and CEO. ''She thought she'd work at The New York Public Library until she figured out what to do next,'' he said. ''Well, she never left.''  She was the library's third-longest serving employee, working most recently in the 42nd Street research library's special formats processing department of the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Division of Art, Prints and Photographs.  Her supervisor, Deirdre Donohue, described her as the ''matriarch of our work family,'' who cataloged hundreds of items ''that were the products of detective work, deep research and skepticism about facts.''  Ms. Coblentz was a bibliophile with interests that ranged well beyond the written word. Her blog on the library's website was full of eclectic arcana. She demystified a Wikipedia debate over whether the Syrian author of ''Scala Paradisi'' wrote in the sixth or seventh century. And she rhapsodized about photographs of the last ''blue blood moon'' seen over North America in 1866.  As a rare materials cataloger for the Spencer Collection -- it ''surveys the illustrated word and book bindings of all periods and all countries and cultures,'' the library says -- she conducted public tours of the steel stacks beneath what is now known as the Stephen A. Schwarzman Building on 42nd Street, reminding visitors that browsing among those books was prohibited and that researchers had to order hard copies of materials from the card catalog, which was later digitized.  ''That's why catalogers are the most important workers in this library,'' she would tell her tour group.  Ms. Coblentz was a true-blue Yankees fan (she and a friend were planning to go to a game being played two days after her death), and a committed cinephile.  She collaborated with her former teacher from the 1990s at the New School, Robert E. Kapsis, a professor emeritus of Sociology and Film Studies at Queens College and the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, on researching (including translating avant-garde European criticism into English), editing and indexing books.  She edited anthologies of interviews with contemporary filmmakers and was a contributing editor, writer and programmer for Professor Kapsis's interactive Multimedia Hitchcock project in 1999 at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Los Angeles.  And she ran in several New York City Marathons.  Kathie Lynn Coblentz was born on Nov. 4, 1947. Her father was Dr. Jacob Coblentz, an immigrant born in Riga, Latvia, who was a bacteriologist in Lansing, Mich., where she appears to have been born. He also worked in Tennessee and Ohio before settling in Frankfort, Mich., where he was employed by the Pet Evaporated Milk Company and the Michigan Department of Health; he died when she was 10. Her mother was Sidney Ellarea Coblentz, an art teacher and artist.  Even in high school in Frankfort, in northwest Michigan, Ms. Coblentz demonstrated a bent for cataloging, winning a mathematics award for a paper titled ''Some Possible Systems of Numerical Notation.''  She earned a degree in German from Michigan State University in 1968 and a master's of library science from the University of Michigan in 1969. She learned Danish, Norwegian and Swedish so that she could read her favorite Scandinavian authors of murder mysteries unaltered by translation.  She had no immediate survivors. Her older brother, Peter, died in 1969.  For a lifelong cataloger who wrote a high school paper on improving ways to sort things numerically, her system of classifying her own collection of books at home defied library science and was ripe for parody. Ms. Coblentz had 16 bookcases holding more than 200 feet of shelf space in her one-bedroom apartment. The books were arranged by country of origin, size, sentimentality and personal obsession.  ''Your system doesn't have to be logical,'' she told The new_york_times in 2005. ''It just has to work for you.''  Kathie Coblentz in 2005. Her interests ranged well beyond books. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAXTON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003s "
297		"    As Talks End, U.S. Must Sell Climate Goals  By Somini Sengupta  1,443 words 24 April 2021   1     There were notable pledges of action, but several important greenhouse gas polluters were conspicuously silent. It showed the challenges that lie ahead.  Now comes the hard part.  President Biden's summit meeting on climate change ended on Friday with the United States promising to reduce its dependence on fossil fuels and help other countries do the same. But the real test will be Washington's ability to steer the rest of the world toward cleaner energy fast enough to avert catastrophe.  The limits of America's influence were clear. Australia, India, Indonesia, Mexico and Russia made no new pledges to cut down on oil, gas or coal. Some countries said that they were being asked for sacrifices even though they had contributed little to the problem, and that they needed money to cope.  Away from the summit, the Chinese foreign minister demonstrated the difficulties the Biden administration faces in working with the country most crucial to lowering global greenhouse gas emissions.  The minister, Wang Yi, warned that Chinese cooperation would depend on how the United States responded to Beijing's policies regarding Hong Kong, Taiwan and Xinjiang Province.  ''Our two countries still have many differences, but still, President Xi attended the climate summit convened by President Biden. So, that is an action taken by China at the top level to work with the United States on climate change,'' Mr. Wang said at a virtual event hosted by the Council on Foreign Relations. ''If the United States no longer interferes in China's internal affairs, then we can have even smoother cooperation that can bring more benefits to both countries and the rest of the world.''  The United States is the largest emitter of greenhouse gases in history; China is currently the largest emitter.  The Biden administration this week pledged to roughly halve its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 -- an ambitious goal that is slightly below the target enshrined in law by the European Union and significantly below that of Britain. China, which argues that its industrialization began much later than in the West, is still increasing its emissions; it has said it will hit peak emissions by 2030 and draw them down to net zero by 2060.  China's emissions stem in large part from burning coal, the world's dirtiest fossil fuel. The country is, by far, the world's largest coal consumer, and it is building new coal plants at home and abroad, even as the United States and Europe have begun to retire their coal fleets. Chinese President Xi Jinping said at the summit that China would ''strictly limit'' coal projects in the immediate future and ''phase down'' coal after 2025.  Republicans in the United States immediately criticized the administration because China had not announced new emissions reductions targets.  In an interview Friday after the White House summit, the United States climate envoy, John Kerry, dismissed that criticism. He said he was optimistic that Beijing would raise its climate ambitions before the crucial climate negotiations sponsored by the United Nations in Glasgow in November and that he hoped China would announce a suspension of its funding for coal projects beyond its borders.  ''We made a first step with China,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Now we continue the diplomacy. We've got to go deal with China.''  Jennifer Hillman, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, has been paying close attention to climate diplomacy this week. She said she saw the Chinese president's participation at the summit as a promising sign. China's foreign minister's comments the following day were sobering, though, with Mr. Wang laying down what sounded like conditions expected in exchange for cooperation with the United States on climate change.  ''Today was more a realistic picture,'' Ms. Hillman said. ''What I heard from Wang Yi is that there are a lot of prerequisites for this cooperation that are going to be very difficult.''  As in all diplomacy, there is a range of carrots and sticks available to the United States to advance climate action.  Money is at the heart of it. And there, the pledges at the summit left many people underwhelmed. The United States said it would double climate finance for developing countries to $5.7 billion a year. That represents a fraction of what the world needs, Manish Bapna, interim president of the World Resources Institute, said in a statement. It also lags behind many other rich countries, he pointed out, and ''does not meet the needs expressed by leaders of vulnerable countries.''  That is all the more important if the United States, along with other Western countries, is to nudge emerging economies to meet their growing energy needs through renewable sources, said Jennifer Tollmann, a Berlin-based policy adviser at the climate research organization E3G. The United States is in a position to push the World Bank to make climate finance a centerpiece of its lending, for instance, and to respond to demands from many countries to ease their debt burdens so they can use their revenues to deal with climate change.  ''Statements from various country leaders were very compelling and very clear: 'We are being left behind. Where is the money?''' Ms. Tollmann said.  That is something the United States must do with its allies in the coming months, Ms. Tollmann said. A failure to raise huge amounts of capital to pay for the effects of climate change is ''a risk factor,'' she said, for the climate talks in November in Glasgow. That is the deadline for all countries to deliver new climate targets. The current targets are nowhere near what's sufficient to avert the worst effects of warming.  Not least, the Biden administration's announcement of $1.2 billion for the Green Climate Fund, which is designed to help poor countries address climate change, was seen by many as a drop in the bucket.  The United States and India late Thursday announced a joint effort to ''mobilize finance and speed clean energy deployment'' to help India achieve its goal to deploy huge amounts of renewable energy capacity by 2030. How much money would be in that package, and whether from public or private sources, was unclear.  Much remains unresolved barely three months into a presidency that has vowed to make climate change a centerpiece of its foreign policy. Many important capitals don't yet have a United States ambassador in place, let alone diplomats versed in the science and economics of climate policy.  The administration needs the approval of Congress to mobilize money for its domestic climate goals and for overseas development aid that it's promised. There is no political appetite, especially among Republicans, for a carbon tax. And Mr. Kerry has said he is ''concerned'' about a carbon border tax that the European Union is poised to establish on imports that come from countries that do not impose levies on goods that depend heavily on fossil fuels.  The administration's next test of climate diplomacy comes when Mr. Biden travels to Britain and Belgium in June for the next Group of 7 meeting, his first overseas trip as president. That is all the more crucial if it expects to move China along.  Relations between Washington and Beijing are at their lowest in decades, and even on the issue of climate change, there have been tense exchanges of words. The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman last week described the re-entry of the United States into the Paris climate agreement as a ''truant getting back to class.''  Mr. Kerry said on Friday that the comment was ''not particularly conducive'' to a conversation on climate action, and that he had told his Chinese counterparts just that.  Key to any American strategy, analysts said, is breaking out of the isolation of the last four years, which makes the next few months extremely important. ''If the United States wants to have significant leverage with China it will have to work with allies,'' Ms. Hillman of the Council on Foreign Relations said.  Lisa Friedman contributed reporting.  Lisa Friedman contributed reporting.  President Biden spoke from the East Room of the White House on Friday, the second and final day of his virtual climate summit meeting. Middle, a power station in Shanghai, and above, a fuel tank truck driving near the Druzhba oil pipeline in Samara, Russia. President Xi Jinping said that China would ''strictly limit'' coal projects, while Russia made no new pledges to cut down on oil, gas or coal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times; JOHANNES EISELE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; REUTERS) (A11)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003r "
298		"    China's Top Fighter Is a Champion Without a Cause  By Amy Qin and Amy Chang Chien  1,460 words 24 April 2021   8     In China, she's a symbol of women's rights and a national hero. But Zhang Weili, who defends her U.F.C. title in Florida on Saturday, cares about just one label: champion.  Days before the bout to defend her championship title, Zhang Weili, China's most famous mixed martial arts fighter, sensed that her opponent was trying to get under her skin.  The opponent, the Lithuanian-American fighter Rose Namajunas, had framed their clash for the Ultimate Fighting Championship's 115-pound title as no less than an ideological contest between freedom and Communism. ''Better dead than red,'' Ms. Namajunas said, using a McCarthy era anti-Communist slogan.  But Ms. Zhang, 30, a strawweight who has lost only one of her 22 professional fights, wasn't about to take the bait.  ''We are just athletes,'' Ms. Zhang said in an interview from Jacksonville, Fla., where on Saturday she will face Ms. Namajunas in front of a sold-out crowd.  ''Don't kid yourself into thinking you're so important,'' she added.  Ms. Zhang might be modest about her own importance, but for her millions of fans she is not just one of the world's greatest female fighters. Standing 5-foot-3, Ms. Zhang has become a real, if reluctant, symbol of women's rights and a national hero.  To spectators (and opponents) outside her home country, she is the hard-hitting face of a modern, assertive China and its Communist Party. To her government, she is the pride of the nation and a propaganda boon. To her female fans, she is a role model whose defiance of gender stereotypes has pushed the boundaries of what it means to be a Chinese woman.  To Ms. Zhang, though, such talk is little more than a distraction. The fighter might readily drape China's flag around her shoulders after a win, but she rarely talks about politics in public. She has little to say about women's rights and doesn't see herself as a feminist. ''What does that term even mean?'' she asked, seeming genuinely puzzled.  When she's not battering opponents with powerful punches and spin kicks, Ms. Zhang is self-deprecating and goofy, even. She loves a good selfie filter and perks up any time the conversation turns to food.  But colleagues say that beneath her sunny exterior is a mind focused solely on winning. That intensity, they say, has propelled Ms. Zhang, a coal worker's daughter, to the top of the U.F.C.'s global rankings.  ''No matter how many belts she wins, she doesn't change,'' said Cai Xuejun, Ms. Zhang's coach since 2013. ''We are already at the peak, and she is still thinking about how to improve.''  The fight on Saturday will be Ms. Zhang's first since March of last year, when she successfully defended her title in an epic five-round battle in Las Vegas against the Polish fighter Joanna Jedrzejczyk.  At the time, China was still trying to bring the coronavirus under control and the United States had not yet gone into lockdown. Weeks before the bout, Ms. Jedrzejczyk posted a photoshopped poster of herself in a gas mask next to Ms. Zhang. She later apologized for making light of the virus.  ''My country is ravaged by the epidemic,'' an emotional Ms. Zhang, her face barely recognizable from the swelling, said after the fight. ''I hope China will win the battle; the epidemic is a common enemy of humankind.''  Though such patriotic rhetoric might suggest otherwise, Ms. Zhang was trained outside the state-controlled sports machine that grooms China's Olympians. Instead, the champion known to fans as ''Magnum'' discovered a love of fighting on her own.  Growing up in the northern province of Hebei, Ms. Zhang was an energetic child. She fought frequently with her two older brothers and was once caught trying to escape her kindergarten by scaling the walls. To keep her occupied, her mother dug holes in the ground out of which the 5-year-old would practice jumping. Over time, the holes became deeper.  ''My mother was very supportive,'' Ms. Zhang recalled. ''She always told me that girls should be independent and not weak.''  When she was 13, Ms. Zhang enrolled in a martial arts academy in Handan, a city with a deep-rooted fighting tradition.  The school, which focused on sanda, a form of kickboxing developed by the Chinese military, instilled in her a sense of discipline.  Of its 500 students, Ms. Zhang was one of only about 30 girls.  ''When I was a kid, before I started training in martial arts, I would get in a lot of fights,'' she said. ''Later, I stopped looking for my own fights -- I just fought on behalf of other people.''  Despite winning a provincial sanda championship, a recurring back injury forced Ms. Zhang to quit the sport at the age of 17. Her parents suggested that she go to beauty school to become a hairstylist.  No way, Ms. Zhang recalled thinking. ''I wanted to find my own path,'' she said. She bought a one-way ticket to Beijing.  For the next six years, Ms. Zhang drifted around the capital and worked odd jobs, including as a hotel receptionist, a kindergarten teacher and a security guard.  Ms. Zhang was working at a gym in the early 2010s when she first began practicing mixed martial arts. She liked how M.M.A. incorporated multiple fighting styles, in contrast to traditional forms like kung fu.  She made the leap to professional fighting in 2013, and in 2018 she signed with the U.F.C. The next year, she knocked out the Brazilian fighter Jessica Andrade in just 42 seconds, taking the women's strawweight title and becoming the first Chinese champion in U.F.C. history.  Since then, Ms. Zhang has become a national star. State-run news outlets have called her ''the most capable female fighter in China'' and the ''woman warrior of the East.''  Following her win last year in Las Vegas, she was enlisted by the Communist Youth League to make a video encouraging young Chinese to ''dedicate your best youth to your beloved motherland.'' Around the same time, the American cosmetics company Estée Lauder named her its brand ambassador in China.  On Chinese social media, Ms. Zhang often posts videos about her training sessions and her schnauzer, Miu, for her 5.5 million followers. Her fans write frequently about being inspired by her rejection of traditional notions of how a woman should look and behave. Some people also speculate about her love life -- she says she is single -- and joke about whether anyone would dare to date her given her violent occupation.  ''Those people don't understand me. They only see who I am inside the octagon,'' Ms. Zhang said, referring to the eight-sided ring in which U.F.C. fights take place.  From her U.F.C. winnings alone, Ms. Zhang has earned around $1 million, according to her agent. Despite that success, she said, little about her life has changed. She still rents a house on the outskirts of Beijing with seven other people, including her coach and one of her brothers. She still trains five hours a day at the nearby Black Tiger Fight Club.  Ms. Zhang's fame in China has been a windfall for the U.F.C., which has been actively expanding its presence in the country, including opening a $13 million training facility in Shanghai.  ''She's been the tide that lifts all boats,'' said Kevin Chang, U.F.C.'s senior vice-president for the Asia-Pacific region.  Days before her showdown on Saturday with Ms. Namajunas, Ms. Zhang said she was feeling good. She had already begun to torture herself by looking at photos of the foods she was hoping to eat after the fight. (Ice cream and steamed buns are among her favorites, she said.)  Had she thought about what would she say in the octagon if she won? Would there be another impassioned plea about humankind?  She wasn't sure, but just in case, she had in her back pocket a signature line in English that she has sometimes used after a win.  ''My name is Zhang Weili!'' she yells triumphantly. ''I am from China -- remember me!''  Zhang Weili, above in Beijing while training last month and at left in Las Vegas after a victory last year, is to defend her U.F.C. strawweight title on Saturday in Florida against Rose Namajunas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GILLES SABRIÉ FOR THE new_york_times; STEVE MARCUS/LAS VEGAS SUN, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003q "
299		"    Alternate Juror on Chauvin Trial Speaks Out: 'I Could Feel Their Pain'  By John Eligon  1,438 words 24 April 2021   18     She was known as Juror 96 and sat through three weeks of testimony, but Lisa Christensen didn't get to decide Derek Chauvin's fate. She was selected as an alternate.  MINNEAPOLIS -- Lisa Christensen stood feet from the blue angel painted on a patch of pavement she had become intimately familiar with over the past month. Under the spittle of rain droplets, she clasped her hands in front of her chest and said a prayer to George Floyd.  ''I hope we gave him justice,'' she said. ''Hope he's looking down and proud of what the jury did, that we did our best, that we didn't disappoint him.''  Ms. Christensen, 56, was one of the 14 jurors in the Derek Chauvin trial, and over three weeks of testimony, this South Minneapolis intersection was the backdrop for the trauma she had to watch nearly every day -- gruesome video footage of Mr. Chauvin pressing his knee into Mr. Floyd's neck.  On Friday, she visited the intersection, known as George Floyd Square, for the first time.  ''This makes it really real,'' she said, before resting a colorful bouquet of flowers among the many items memorializing Mr. Floyd and other people killed by the police.  It was in many ways a bookend to a singular experience, a front-row seat to one of the country's most consequential police killing cases. Through 45 witnesses and the arguments of the lawyers, she sat anonymously on the 18th floor of a courthouse in downtown Minneapolis, referred to only as Juror 96.  Her experience ended abruptly after closing arguments, when the judge, Peter A. Cahill, told her and another juror that they were the alternates, who would have stepped in only if another juror was unable to continue serving for any reason.  None of the 12 jurors who deliberated and decided Mr. Chauvin's fate have chosen to speak out, so Ms. Christensen's description of how she saw the trial is the only insight into how members of the jury perceived the case.  After naming the two alternates, the judge offered to arrange counseling for them if needed and asked for their thoughts on the case. He then sent them home while the remaining 12 jurors were sequestered in a hotel room to deliberate.  Ms. Christensen was then free to discuss the case, and on Friday she seemed to shed her status as a dispassionate juror, instead leaning into advocacy for Mr. Floyd.  At the memorial, she stood among signs declaring ''Black lives matter'' and ''Justice for George Floyd.'' She carefully circled a sculpture of a fist in the middle of the intersection and reflected on why she believed that the jury did the right thing by convicting Mr. Chauvin of all three charges he faced, including second-degree murder.  The prosecution's medical experts convinced her that Mr. Chauvin had murdered Mr. Floyd by kneeling on him and depriving him of oxygen. And the expert witnesses the defense called only weakened its case in her eyes.  When one of them, Barry Brodd, a police expert, suggested that someone could rest comfortably in the prone position, facedown on the pavement, it angered her because it seemed like a ridiculous assertion in this context, she said. Then came the defense's medical expert, Dr. David Fowler, Maryland's former chief medical examiner. She did not buy his explanation that a combination of drugs, pre-existing medical conditions and even carbon monoxide was to blame for Mr. Floyd's death.  ''I just don't think it was real believable,'' Ms. Christensen said of the defense's case. ''At that point, I felt like they were just trying to say anything. Kind of like, let's just throw everything out there and see what sticks to the wall.''  Ms. Christensen, who said she entered the trial having seen very little of the video of Mr. Floyd's murder, described an experience that was more taxing than she could have imagined. It was filled with unexpected twists, from the mundane -- a mini-crisis when the Cheetos ran out in the jury room -- to the extraordinary, when a police officer killed a 20-year-old man six blocks from her home in the suburb of Brooklyn Center.  ''It was more emotional and more draining than I thought,'' she said of her jury service.  Very little was ordinary about this trial. Because of the coronavirus pandemic, very few people were allowed in the courtroom. And because of the high-profile nature of the case, jurors were anonymous and had to be shuttled in and out of the courthouse as discreetly as possible.  Before court each day, jurors convened at meeting places outside of Minneapolis, depending on where they lived, Ms. Christensen said. Her meeting spot was behind a sheriff's outpost in Brooklyn Park. (The other gathering points were at sheriff's facilities in Plymouth and Golden Valley, and a public works facility in Bloomington, she said.)  The jurors would load into vans with out-of-state license plates that would drive them to the courthouse's underground parking lot, within an area fortified by temporary fencing.  Ms. Christensen, who is white, said that while she felt Mr. Chauvin was in the wrong, she did not view the case through the larger prism of racial justice. She believes that there is a problem with racism in the country, but said she was not well versed on the nuances of it.  She recently got into a dispute with her roommate, who is Black, when she asked him why Mr. Floyd and other people do not just comply with police commands. ''Several times they had to say, 'Get out of the car' or 'Put your hands on the steering wheel.' And for whatever reason, he just didn't do it.'' But she said that even if she did not understand Mr. Floyd's resistance, he was treated improperly by the officers.  Her feelings were solidified during the testimony of Dr. Martin J. Tobin, a pulmonologist called by the prosecution.  ''He pointed out exactly when Mr. Floyd took his last breath,'' she said. ''So that was powerful. And then I feel like all the doctors that the prosecutors presented pretty much said the same thing in so many different ways. I feel like they all came to the same conclusion.''  Asked if there was a moment when she doubted the prosecution's case and thought that maybe Mr. Chauvin was not guilty, Ms. Christensen was unequivocal: ''No.''  If the medical experts were decisive for her regarding Mr. Floyd's cause of death, Ms. Christensen said testimony from bystanders helped her to understand how out of line Mr. Chauvin was. Sitting close to the witness box, she teared up at times when witnesses cried as they recalled seeing the life slowly pressed out of Mr. Floyd. One moment in particular that got to her, Ms. Christensen said, was when a girl on the stand fought back tears, but her chin quivered.  ''I could feel the guilt,'' she said. ''I could feel their pain.''  And the reaction of the bystanders made the actions of Mr. Chauvin and the other officers there seem all the more perplexing, she said.  ''How can all these different people stand on the sidewalk and notice there is something wrong in this situation -- I mean, even a 9-year-old could tell you something was wrong,'' she said. ''How come grown officers, that this is your profession, you've had multiple hours of being trained, that you guys can't tell there's something wrong?''  Ultimately, it felt like Eric J. Nelson, Mr. Chauvin's lawyer, could not offer any good explanation for Mr. Chauvin's actions in the nine minutes and 29 seconds he knelt on Mr. Floyd, she said.  And she did not believe that Mr. Chauvin could have explained it away, so she said it was probably a good idea that he did not testify on his own behalf.  ''I don't think he comes across as like a likable kind of guy,'' she said. ''And maybe that's just because we've seen the video so many times and that picture. Him sitting in the courtroom, he just gave off a cold vibe.''  LISA CHRISTENSEN, otherwise known as Juror 96, speaking of the prosecution (PHOTOGRAPH BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times); Outside of the Hennepin County Government Center, where the verdict was read Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSHUA RASHAAD MCFADDEN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003p "
300		"    Biles Swaps Sponsors, Making a Statement as She Does  By Kevin Draper  1,266 words 24 April 2021   8     As part of the deal, Athleta, the new sponsor, has agreed to back a post-Olympic exhibition tour that Biles was already planning.  Simone Biles, the most decorated gymnast ever, has signed an agreement to represent the women's clothing brand Athleta and is leaving Nike, her longtime sponsor, just three months before the Summer Olympics begin in Tokyo.  The deal, announced Friday, also includes arrangements for Athleta to fund a post-Olympic gymnastics exhibition tour organized by Biles that will represent a direct financial challenge to U.S.A. Gymnastics, the sport's national governing body.  In interviews, Biles suggested she felt better aligned with the values of Athleta, a division of the clothing retailer Gap, than with those of Nike. ''I think they stand for everything that I stand for,'' she said of Athleta to The Wall Street Journal, which first reported the agreement.  Over the past several years Nike has faced a number of scandals over how it treats female employees and sponsored athletes. Women have spoken up about a toxic atmosphere at Nike's headquarters in Beaverton, Ore., and about sponsorship contracts that penalize athletes who become pregnant. Also a Nike coach was accused of verbally abusing female runners and was suspended by the U.S. Center for SafeSport.  Biles joined a trickle of athletes who recently left Nike. This week, the estate of Kobe Bryant, the Los Angeles Lakers star who died in a helicopter crash last year, allowed his contract with the company to expire, and his widow, Vanessa Bryant, said she would pursue a new deal.  By sponsoring Biles's Gold Over America Tour, Athleta provides financial muscle for her to more directly undercut U.S.A. Gymnastics, an organization that she has repeatedly said cannot be trusted given its failure to keep girls and women safe from Lawrence G. Nassar, the national team doctor who was convicted on multiple counts of sexually abusing athletes. A spokeswoman for U.S.A. Gymnastics, which traditionally organizes a tour after the Olympics, said the organization had no such plan for this year.  Athleta will also develop an activewear line with Biles, who will collaborate with the company's design team. Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.  ''It is more than just a sports apparel sponsorship,'' said Mary Beth Laughton, Athleta's president. ''We really view it as a way to support Simone in her full life. As she takes on the next stage in her career in Tokyo and beyond, we really want to support that as well.''  Biles originally signed with Nike in 2015, shortly after she turned professional and won the individual all-around title at the world championships. She represented Nike at the 2016 Olympics, where she won five medals, including four golds. She is a favorite to add to her medal haul at the Tokyo Games. It is widely believed that this will be the final Olympics for Biles, 24, though she recently suggested that she might compete at the 2024 Summer Games in Paris.  ''Our contract with Simone Biles has ended, and we wish her the very best,'' a Nike spokesman, Josh Benedek, said in a statement.  At Athleta, Biles will join the track sprinter Allyson Felix, a fellow American who has won nine Olympic medals and who was also sponsored by Nike for several years. Felix signed with Athleta in 2019, shortly after participating in a blistering video that criticized Nike for financially penalizing athletes who became pregnant. Nike changed its policies shortly afterward.  In recent months, Nike has not renewed the contracts of several of other track and field athletes, like the long-jumper Tianna Bartoletta and the pole-vaulter Piotr Lisek, both of whom hope to compete at the Olympics this summer.  The Olympics are the single biggest marketing stage for Nike and for its competitors, like Adidas and Puma. Sports brands compete fiercely to sponsor anticipated medalists and entire governing bodies of a sport. Even without Biles and Felix, Nike's swoosh will be omnipresent in Tokyo, where it will be represented by hundreds of athletes as well as numerous national governing bodies sending teams to the Games, including the U.S. Soccer Federation and U.S.A. Track & Field.  The gymnasts competing for the United States at the Olympics will wear uniforms made by GK Elite.  Marketing at the Olympics is important for sports brands not because of direct sales of gear, but because of the halo effect the event creates around the brand.  Nike and other companies want to tell potential customers a story about elite athletic performance and product innovation -- a narrative that becomes easier to sell (and possibly to believe) when hundreds of athletes wear its shoes and apparel while winning gold.  Athleta, whose only sponsored athletes are Felix and Biles, sells more general activewear rather than sport-specific clothing, and its brand is focused on inclusivity, women's empowerment and sustainability. In taking athlete endorsers away from Nike, Athleta has joined other niche sports apparel brands like Oiselle, whose best-known endorser is Kara Goucher, a long-distance runner who was sponsored by Nike and has become a strong critic of the company.  ''We definitely do admire the courage of Simone and Allyson, and all of the young women and athletes who have spoken up and used their voices,'' said Laughton, the Athleta president.  While Biles's move implicitly criticizes Nike, her tour is explicitly taking aim at U.S.A. Gymnastics. Biles, one of more than 300 athletes who have said that Nassar molested them, has repeatedly criticized U.S.A. Gymnastics and the United States Olympic Committee as seeming to be more interested in avoiding responsibility for Nassar's abuse than in finding the truth.  Now Biles, with the help of Athleta, is challenging what was once a major source of revenue for U.S.A. Gymnastics.  Biles's Gold Over America Tour, which was planned before she signed the deal with Athleta, will visit 35 cities across the United States in the fall after the Olympics. The biggest stars to sign on with Biles so far are Laurie Hernandez, who won a team gold alongside Biles at the 2016 Olympics, and Katelyn Ohashi, a former U.C.L.A. gymnast whose college routines frequently yielded viral videos.  Though U.S.A. Gymnastics does not report specific revenue from its traditional post-Olympic tour, the organization's annual financial statements suggest that the series has been a big moneymaker.  In 2016, when it staged a 36-city post-Olympic tour, U.S.A. Gymnastics reported $12.9 million in what it labeled ''national event revenues.'' In 2017, it reported $4.1 million in national event revenues, and in 2018, the last year of available data, just $2.1 million.  U.S.A. Gymnastics filed for bankruptcy protection in 2018, after more than 100 lawsuits were filed by survivors of Nassar's abuse, and it is still working through the reorganization process.  ''While U.S.A. Gymnastics has no plans for a post-Olympic tour in 2021, we are thrilled that the Gold Over America Tour will allow fans around the country to connect with our sport and the incredible athletes who will be taking part,'' Meredith Yeoman, a spokeswoman for U.S.A. Gymnastics, said in an email.  Simone Biles left Nike for Athleta. The women's clothing company is planning to sponsor a gymnastics tour organized by Biles. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW SPEAR FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003m "
301		"    Caitlyn Jenner Announces Bid for Governor  By Jennifer Medina and Maggie Haberman  570 words 24 April 2021   15     Ms. Jenner, a Republican former Olympian and transgender activist, said on Friday that she was running to challenge Gov. Gavin Newsom, a Democrat facing an all but certain recall election.  Caitlyn Jenner, the Republican former Olympian and prominent transgender activist, announced on Friday that she would challenge Gov. Gavin Newsom of California in this year's recall election.  Ms. Jenner, whose candidacy represents one of the most prominent bids for public office by an openly transgender person in the United States, said she had filed initial paperwork to run.  A recall election is all but certain in California, where Mr. Newsom, a Democrat, has come under attack for his handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Republicans and backers of the recall effort have focused in particular on his leadership of the state's economy.  Officially, it is still uncertain if and when a recall vote will happen, but organizers have said for months that they have exceeded the 1.5 million signatures needed to trigger such an election. It would most likely be held this fall.  In many ways, the effort is the work of Republicans struggling to maintain relevance in the overwhelmingly Democratic state. And Ms. Jenner faces a steep uphill battle: A recent poll from the Public Policy Institute of California found that just 40 percent of voters in the state supported a recall and more than half approved of Mr. Newsom's performance.  ''For the past decade, we have seen the glimmer of the Golden State reduced by one-party rule that places politics over progress and special interests over people,'' Ms. Jenner wrote in her announcement, calling herself a ''compassionate disrupter.'' ''This will be a campaign of solutions, providing a roadmap back to prosperity to turn this state around and finally clean up the damage Newsom has done to this state.''  Celebrities running for office is nothing new in California, where voters elected Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger, the latter in a special recall election in 2003 that ousted Gov. Gray Davis. But Ms. Jenner is a political unknown in the state, where it is notoriously expensive to campaign for statewide office.  Despite criticism of Mr. Newsom's handling of the pandemic and other controversies, a recent poll found that just 40 percent of the state's voters would support a recall of the governor. No other Democrat has entered the race, and elected Democrats have repeatedly pledged to stick by Mr. Newsom, helping to shore up his support among Latino, Asian and Black voters in particular.  The race would come at a time of steep challenges for California. In addition to the pandemic, the state is likely to face another drought for the second time in less than a decade.  Ms. Jenner, whose candidacy was earlier reported by Axios, chose to run after meeting with several advisers who also worked for former President Donald J. Trump, which could complicate her chances in California. Democrats have repeatedly painted the recall effort as a plan supported largely by far-right extremists. Ms. Jenner supported Mr. Trump early on when he ran for president, but withdrew her support in 2018 after his administration repeatedly attacked transgender rights.  Caitlyn Jenner speaking at the fourth annual Women's March in Los Angeles in January 2020.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Chelsea Guglielmino/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003n "
302		"    Chip Shortage Creates Chaos For Carmakers  By Jack Ewing and Neal E. Boudette  1,544 words 24 April 2021   1     Almost every carmaker has had to curtail production, hampering the economic recovery.  Around the world, auto assembly lines are going quiet, workers are idle and dealership parking lots are looking bare.  A shortage of semiconductors, the tiny but critical chips used to calibrate cars' fuel injection, run infotainment systems or provide the brains for cruise control, has upended automaking.  A General Motors plant in Kansas City closed in February for lack of chips, and still hasn't reopened. Mercedes-Benz has begun to hoard its chips for expensive models and is temporarily shutting down factories that produce lower-priced C-Class sedans. Porsche warned dealers in the United States this month that customers might have to wait an extra 12 weeks to get their cars, because they lack a chip used to monitor tire pressure.  The French automaker Peugeot, part of the newly formed Stellantis automaking empire, has gone so far as to substitute old-fashioned analog speedometers for digital units in some models.  The disruption could not come at a worse time. Demand for cars has bounced back strongly from the pandemic slump, with consumers ready to spend money they saved over the past year, eager to avoid airplanes by taking road trips. The supply of semiconductors is depriving carmakers of a chance to make up sales they lost.  ''We have already a robust demand situation being more held back by the semiconductor issue than anything else,'' Ola Källenius, the chief executive of Daimler, said in an interview.  Some automakers, such as Renault, have begun to triage their chips, reserving them for more costly models that bring more profit. ''We're trying to find an intelligent way to prioritize cars with the higher margins,'' Clotilde Delbos, Renault's deputy chief executive, told analysts on Thursday.  Some buyers may be lucky enough to take home a new car, but it may lack options that use specialized chips. Porsche has told U.S. dealers that for several months it won't be able to deliver high-end seats in the Macan S.U.V. that can be adjusted 18 different ways, a popular upgrade. The necessary chips are unavailable.  One big reason automakers can't find enough chips is that semiconductor manufacturers have given priority to manufacturers of smartphones, video game consoles and other consumer electronics, which tend to be more lucrative customers.  A modern car can easily have more than 3,000 chips. But cars account for a tiny share of chip demand. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, or TSMC, is one of the few makers of a variety of chips vital to auto manufacturing, but in 2020 carmakers generated only 3 percent of the company's sales, according to Roland Berger, a German consulting firm.  TSMC's most important customers are smartphone makers, which accounted for half of sales. Smartphones outnumber cars by a wide margin. In 2019, before the pandemic disrupted global economies, auto factories churned out 93 million vehicles compared with smartphone production of 1.4 billion units.  Over all, the chip shortage and other supply chain snarls curtailed production by 1.3 million vehicles in the first three months of the year, according to IHS Markit, a consultancy.  The problem has become a concern for political leaders in Washington and other capitals.  Peter Altmaier, the German economics minister, recently appealed to his counterpart in Taiwan, a global center for semiconductor manufacturers, asking in so many words whether the Taiwanese minister couldn't help shake loose a few chips urgently needed by German carmakers.  The chip shortage ''has become a serious problem for manufacturers, especially the auto industry,'' a group of German economic research institutes warned in a joint report this month.  The crisis has exposed not only how dependent the car industry is on a few suppliers, but also how vulnerable it is to disruptions. Supply chain managers shuddered last month when an early-morning fire knocked out production at a factory owned by Renesas Electronics in Hitachinaka, Japan, north of Tokyo. Renesas is a crucial supplier of chips used to monitor brake functioning, control power steering, trigger airbags and in many other tasks.  Weather has also played a role. Storms in Texas earlier in the year temporarily forced the shutdown of three semiconductor factories. And Taiwan is in the midst of a severe drought, analysts at IHS Markit warned in a recent report. Chip manufacturing requires large amounts of very pure water.  Even without a pandemic and supply chain disruptions, the auto industry is in turmoil. In the United States, sales have been basically flat since the early 2000s. Profit margins are slim. Some big automakers may not survive the shift to electric cars.  ''If I were a chip manufacturer I wouldn't start investing in a new plant unless I got free money from the government,'' said ManMohan S. Sodhi, who teaches supply chain management at the business school at City, University of London.  Free money may be on the way. The White House held a summit on the chip shortage this month, and has proposed allocating $50 billion in infrastructure funds to reverse a decline in the share of chip manufacturing that takes place on American shores. But new chip factories can't be built fast enough to solve the immediate shortage.  And unless government subsidies persuade them otherwise, semiconductor makers and other suppliers are likely to build any new factories in or near China, which is the biggest car market and, unlike the United States and Europe, is growing steadily.  It's not at all clear how long the chip famine could last. Mr. Sodhi said that he suspected chip makers were exaggerating the shortage to pry subsidies from governments, and that the crisis could be over in a month.  Auto industry consultants at Roland Berger are more pessimistic, saying the shortage could last all year.  On Thursday, Ms. Delbos of Renault said ''the visibility is deteriorating'' for determining an end to the chip crisis, ''as news is changing by the day.''  In the meantime, automakers are improvising to try to minimize the damage. Daimler's Mercedes unit is allocating scarce chips to its priciest models, like the EQS electric luxury sedan the company unveiled this month, which is expected to start at around $100,000.  The triage prompted Daimler to temporarily shut down factories in Germany that produce lower-priced C-Class sedans. Most of the 18,500 workers at the plants are furloughed until the end of April, though they will continue to receive government subsidized ''short work'' pay.  Along the same lines, Volkswagen has cut production at plants in Germany that make sedans and other internal combustion models, and one in Mexico where the company makes Tiguan S.U.V.s for the American market. But a factory in Zwickau, Germany, that produces ID.3 sedans and ID.4 S.U.V.s, the vanguard of Volkswagen's drive to dominate the emerging market for electric cars, has not been affected, according to the company.  General Motors, which has had to halt production temporarily at a half-dozen plants since the beginning of the year, has in some cases been producing cars without electrical components and parking them until the parts are available. Ford Motor said Wednesday that it would keep several U.S. plants idle longer than expected because of the chip shortage.  The auto industry has been paralyzed by supply chain disruptions before. Mr. Källenius recalled an episode when a hurricane struck Puerto Rico and shut down production at a factory that, to his surprise and pretty much everyone else's, was the only source of a coating essential to some kinds of auto electronics.  Automobiles have tens of thousands of parts and so many layers of suppliers and sub-suppliers and sub-sub-suppliers that even carmakers have trouble keeping track of every component's provenance.  The economics of the industry are such that only suppliers with the highest volume survive. Smaller suppliers tend to die out because they can't produce parts or materials as cheaply as the big players, leaving the industry dependent on one or two manufacturers of high-pressure fuel lines, for example, or a certain specialized plastic.  The current semiconductor shortage may not be the last. The auto industry's need for semiconductors is expected to explode in coming years because of autonomous driving features and the increasing popularity of electric vehicles, which are more reliant on software than internal combustion engines.  Mr. Källenius said, though, that the most sophisticated chips were not the ones currently giving him headaches. ''We are missing the most simple of chips, that maybe only cost cents or dollars,'' he said. ''That's holding us up from building a product that costs $75,000.''  Vehicles at a General Motors plant in Wentzville, Mo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEFF ROBERSON/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A1); Clockwise from left: A semiconductor production facility for Renesas Electronics in Beijing; President Biden at a summit meeting on the chip shortage this month; and a Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company fabrication building in Tainan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK SCHIEFELBEIN/ASSOCIATED PRESS; AMR ALFIKY/THE new_york_times; AN RONG XU FOR THE new_york_times) (A16)   Document NYTF000020210424eh4o0003k   "
303		"    Post on New Rules After a Heart Attack Goes Viral  By Maria Cramer  934 words 22 April 2021   4     Jonathan Frostick, a program manager at an investment bank, was still in the hospital when he wrote a LinkedIn post vowing to step away from work and spend more time with his family. Thousands responded.  As he sat at his computer on a recent Sunday afternoon preparing for the workweek ahead, Jonathan Frostick, a program manager at an investment bank in London, said he could not breathe. His chest tightened and his ears started to pop. He was having a heart attack.  His first thoughts were of how this would disrupt his work life.  ''I needed to meet with my manager tomorrow,'' Mr. Frostick, who works for HSBC, wrote in a post on LinkedIn. ''This isn't convenient.''  Later, as he convalesced in a hospital bed, Mr. Frostick began to examine his life, he wrote. Beneath a photo of himself in his hospital bed, he posted new vows for his life going forward:  ''I'm not spending all day on Zoom anymore.''  ''I'm restructuring my approach to work.''  He would no longer put up with workplace drama. ''Life is too short,'' he wrote.  Lastly: ''I want to spend more time with my family.''  Since he described his epiphany a week ago, his post has been liked over 200,000 times. It has received more than 10,000 comments from readers describing how their own brushes with death had led them to step back from work and take stock of the way they had been living their lives.  The post resonated at a time when weary people across the world are experiencing ennui, dread and more work-related stress during the coronavirus pandemic.  Even those who have been lucky enough to keep their jobs have questioned their purpose in life as they spend long hours on Zoom calls and answer emails into the night.  At the same time, employees who have managed to strike a better balance between their jobs and their personal lives during the pandemic are now reckoning with a return to the office, causing them to re-evaluate how much time they want to dedicate to work.  ''I know countless people in the last few years who have suffered life-threatening illnesses just simply because there is no downtime -- always on call,'' a management consultant from Alberta, Canada, wrote in reply to Mr. Frostick's post. ''It's absolutely detrimental to our health, but we're built on the existence that we always have to keep pushing.''  Another person described how she had became so burned out at work that she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital.  ''I relate, bro,'' wrote a self-described entrepreneur from Nigeria who said he had sold his multiple cars and homes to lead a happier, more ''Spartan'' life. ''Bro, welcome to the real life. Now you'll truly, truly live.''  Others offered him tips on how to lose weight -- Mr. Frostick also vowed to drop 15 kilograms -- or asked him to appear on their podcasts so he might share his story with their listeners.  Beyond compensation and professional status, a job provides social rewards, like praise from colleagues and supervisors, that can become addictive, said Glen Kreiner, a professor of management at the University of Utah.  People become so protective of the identity a job creates for them that they will work long, arduous hours, without pausing to consider if they are happy or fulfilled, to protect it, Professor Kreiner said.  ''We as humans tend to be mindless instead of mindful,'' he said. ''When we're in a mindless state, we're on autopilot.''  Professor Kreiner added: ''Sometimes, that's why it takes a catastrophe like this to break us out of autopilot.''  Mr. Frostick did not immediately respond to a message for comment.  In an interview with Bloomberg News, Mr. Frostick, a father of three young children, said that during the pandemic he and his colleagues had spent a ''disproportionate amount of time on Zoom calls.''  Before the heart attack, Mr. Frostick had been working 12-hour days, he said, missing his colleagues and suffering from the isolation of working from home.  ''We're not able to have those other conversations off the side of a desk or by the coffee machine, or take a walk and go and have that chat,'' Mr. Frostick told Bloomberg. ''That has been quite profound, not just in my work, but across the professional-services industry.''  Robert A. Sherman, a spokesman for HSBC, said the company had communicated to employees the importance of balancing work with healthy lifestyles.  ''We all wish Jonathan a full and speedy recovery,'' he said in an email. ''We also recognize the importance of personal health and well-being and a good work-life balance. The response to this topic shows how much this is on people's minds, and we are encouraging everyone to make their health and well-being a top priority.''  On Wednesday, Mr. Frostick thanked the thousands of people who had written him and wrote that he was now able to move around his house for two to three hours at a time.  Later, he wrote another post that indicated he had moved from soul-searching to trying to answer profound philosophical questions.  ''Who am I? It's like a riddle my mind cannot solve,'' he wrote. ''I have no idea who I am anymore. This is going to take some time ... Can you answer who you are?''  Jonathan Frostick wrote of a changed perspective on work. It resonated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JONATHAN FROSTICK)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004p "
304		"    Prime Minister Helps Change 'So Long' of British Soccer Clubs to 'So Sorry'  By Stephen Castle  1,253 words 22 April 2021   10     The British prime minister was able to take the moral high ground by opposing the breakaway European soccer league that proved to be highly unpopular with fans.  LONDON -- Fans loathed it, politicians opposed it and even Prince William warned of the damage it risked ''to the game we love.''  So swift and ferocious was the backlash to a plan to create a new super league for European soccer that on Wednesday six of England's most famous clubs were in disarray, issuing abject apologies as they disowned the failed breakaway project they had pledged to join.  Yet not everyone was a loser. For Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain, the crisis has presented a rare opportunity to seize the moral high ground on an issue that matters to many of the voters who helped him to a landslide victory in the 2019 election.  Threatening to use any means he could to block the plan, Mr. Johnson positioned himself as the defender of the working-class soccer fans whose forebears created England's soccer clubs -- and the enemy of the billionaire owners who now dominate the English game.  ''Boris Johnson is a populist by instinct,'' said Anand Menon, professor of European politics and foreign affairs at King's College London, adding that the prime minister spotted a political opportunity in a sporting disaster. The backlash to the super league plan was so complete that Mr. Johnson's opposition was a ''no brainer,'' he said -- the political equivalent of scoring in an open goal.  ''His only slight gamble in trying to stop it was that he might lose, but it was hard to see how that could happen,'' Professor Menon said. Once English and international soccer authorities threatened reprisals against the super league clubs and players, their position was untenable, he said.  Others believe that there could be risks down the line, however, and that in allowing his government to threaten to put everything on the table to prevent the formation of the new league -- even raising the prospect of tampering with the ownership of soccer clubs -- Mr. Johnson might have raised expectations that could not be fulfilled.  Significantly, the government refused to rule out suggestions that it could legislate over ownership or copy German rules that give fans real control by preventing commercial investors from owning more than 49 percent of clubs.  In the short-term, however, the soccer crisis has helped Mr. Johnson by distracting attention away from negative headlines over a lobbying scandal largely centered on one of his predecessors, David Cameron, and his contacts with a current cabinet minister.  On Wednesday that issue crept closer to Mr. Johnson with the emergence of text messages he sent to a businessman and Brexit supporter, James Dyson, promising that Mr. Dyson's employees would not have to pay extra tax if they came to Britain to make ventilators during the early stages of the pandemic. Mr. Dyson's company announced in 2019 that it would move its headquarters to Singapore, citing growing demand in Asia.  In recent months, the successful roll out of vaccines against Covid-19 has revived Mr. Johnson's fortunes after a succession of missteps last year when the government's handling of the pandemic faltered.  So prevalent is soccer now in Britain's national life that it cropped up then, too.  In April 2020, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, attacked highly paid soccer players, calling on them to ''take a pay cut and play their part,'' during the pandemic. But within months the government was outmaneuvered by Marcus Rashford, a star player for Manchester United and England.  Invoking his own poor childhood, Mr. Rashford galvanized a campaign against child poverty, and ultimately forced Mr. Johnson to change policy over free school meals.  This week the boot was on the other foot as Mr. Johnson was able to condemn the super league plans before Mr. Rashford, whose club initially signed up to the proposals.  It required no expertise to be ''horrified'' at the prospect of the super league ''being cooked up by a small number of clubs.,'' wrote Mr. Johnson in the Sun newspaper.  ''Football clubs in every town and city and at every tier of the pyramid have a unique place at the heart of their communities, and are an unrivaled source of passionate local pride,'' he added.  Never a big soccer fan himself, Mr. Johnson framed his opposition to the plan in his belief in competition.  Each year the three worst performing clubs are relegated from England's Premier League -- its top domestic tier -- while the top ones qualify to play in European competitions the following season. The European Super League proposal would have seen a number of big soccer clubs becoming permanent members -- something that Mr. Johnson likened to creating a cartel.  In fact, when England's first Football League was established in 1888 it was on a similar model and its membership was not selected on merit, said Matthew Taylor, professor of history at De Montfort University, Leicester who has written widely on soccer.  Yet the furor over the European Super League illustrates the growing role soccer has played in national life in recent decades.  ''In the last 15-20 years it seems to be so pervasive and so significant to British culture -- very broadly defined -- that politicians have to say something,'' Professor Taylor said.  No longer does it seem odd for politicians and members of the government ''to make statements on issues that 40-50 years ago would have been seen as private matters,'' he added.  That change first became noticeable under Tony Blair's premiership as the growing success of the English Premier League, combined with the country's ''cool Britannia'' branding, gave soccer a great profile.  But soccer can be dangerous territory too for politicians. Mr. Cameron was much mocked when he once appeared to forget his long-running claim to support the Birmingham team Aston Villa and seemed to suggest he favored a rival that played in similar colors.  Mr. Johnson, who appears to prefer rugby to soccer, has avoided that fate by never declaring his allegiance to any team.  But suggestions that the government might legislate to control the ownership of clubs seemed to conflict with Mr. Johnson's free-market instincts.  Although a Saudi Arabian plan to buy the Premier League club Newcastle United ultimately failed, Mr. Johnson promised the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, that he would investigate a holdup to the proposed takeover, according to British media reports.  ''One of the many dishonesties in all this is that it would allow money to corrupt football,'' said Professor Menon, referring to the European Super League plan. ''Money has already corrupted football. Rich clubs get richer.''  The professor said he believed that very little would ultimately change because any substantial intervention would upset the successful operations of the Premier League, and therefore annoy fans.  But Professor Taylor pointed to Germany as a successful alternative model, and said that in threatening to intervene in the running of soccer Mr. Johnson might ultimately disappoint some of those who are applauding him now.  ''Having made such a significant and bold statement, I don't think this discussion will go away now,'' Professor Taylor.  Manchester United's Old Trafford Stadium on Wednesday, after the collapse of English involvement in the proposed European Super League. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jon Super/Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004n "
305		"   LAST CHANCE  An Artist Who Is Always Heading for Home  By Siddhartha Mitter  1,177 words 22 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     Azikiwe Mohammed celebrates everyday heroes and small acts of care in his installations.  In January 2020, an M.T.A. bus driver named Tyrone Hampton found a nonverbal child still sitting onboard at the end of a run in Upper Manhattan. He called for help and watched over the boy until he knew he'd get safely home.  It was a small news story, with a happy ending. But it was the kind of incident that touches Azikiwe Mohammed, 37, an artist who, through different media -- painting, textiles, performative installations -- is interested in constructing spaces of safety and welcome for people of color and for immigrants whose space is often threatened.  ''I have a bunch of alerts set for when people don't make it home,'' Mohammed said in an interview at the Yeh Art Gallery at St. John's University in Jamaica, Queens, where the first exhibition devoted to his textile-based art is concluding soon. One of the 40 pieces in the show is a tribute to Hampton, whose portrait he has stitched onto a vintage denim jacket.  It is just another entry in Mohammed's visual universe, a realm devoted to everyday heroes and small acts of care.  ''Home has always been a difficult idea for Black and brown folk,'' Mohammed said, citing issues of discrimination, displacement, and invasive policing, as in the death of Breonna Taylor. ''I just want better things for our people.''  Mohammed's art has been exhibited commercially, including a solo show of paintings in early 2020 at Anna Zorina Gallery in Chelsea. But he dislikes the art world and its hierarchies, he said, preferring to call himself ''a guy that makes stuff.'' His exhibitions turn galleries into homey spaces intended to put all visitors at ease.  At the Yeh, Mohammed transformed the gallery's plain interior with wood flooring and laminated walls into a country cabin or den, with vintage lamps beside each hanging piece.  His textile art begins with items he finds in thrift stores, which he then cuts, combines or adorns. Some quilt-like works depict Black people at rest, relaxing in a park. Other pieces start with vintage apparel, to which he adds imagery or text invoking figures from daily life, like the bus driver, or America's fraught racial history: Black churches attacked by arsonists, and Black beaches where people found safe recreation during segregation.  Several works made for the Yeh show contain Queens references like the Unisphere, or obscure entries in the oral-history Queens Memory Project. Mohammed is not from the borough -- his mother, a New York City public school educator, is from Harlem, his father, a photographer and substance-abuse counselor, was from Brooklyn, and he lives in the apartment complex in TriBeCa where he grew up -- but Queens, a magnet for migrants, is also his kind of place.  ''Azikiwe is the perfect artist to work in Queens,'' said Owen Duffy, the Yeh Art Gallery's director, who curated the show. ''He has the gift of enfolding the stories of people from many different backgrounds into his work.''  If some artists are world-builders, Mohammed is a homemaker who blurs the lines of art practice in search of something more grounded, something we maybe knew all along.  ''He was always in his own brilliant universe,'' said the filmmaker Garrett Bradley, a friend since childhood, whose projects are currently in the New Museum's ''Grief and Grievance'' show and in contention for an Oscar. Mohammed's work evoked a reality that ''is rooted in a place that is nostalgic, familial, and deeply intimate,'' she said.  ''He is a prophet and a griot,'' said the curator Storm Janse van Rensburg, who organized Mohammed's 2019 exhibition at the SCAD Museum of Art in Savannah, Ga. ''He has created a mirror-universe for the narratives, experiences and futures of people of color.''  Mohammed's performative terrain includes a pop-up thrift store, Jimmy's Thrift of New Davonhaime. A mash-up of names of five cities with Black majorities (New Orleans, Detroit, Jackson, Savannah, Birmingham), New Davonhaime stands in for the whole cultural geography shaped by Black labor and the Great Migration.  Costumed as the friendly proprietor, the artist sells doodads and small artworks, and invites visitors to write on postcards what material or emotional resources they would like from New Davonhaime that they are not getting from the United States. (An iteration at the Knockdown Center in Queens in 2017 included a music exchange and New Davonhaime Ale at the bar.)  Each year, Mohammed takes two months to travel the country, always by bus, looking for New Davonhaime wherever it manifests. When he reaches a new city, his method kicks in. ''Generally, I go to a thrift store, a pawnshop and a used record store,'' he said. ''From the three of those I can get a loose idea of a town. Then I go find a bar.'' He returns with stories, and stuff.  He frequents New York-region thrift shops, as well, and ''stores that don't bother having a name, or the dude who has a garage that's open every Saturday.''  For Mohammed, the mission is more than art. A longtime educator, notably at the Church Street School for Music and Art in TriBeCa, he is now preparing to open his own Black Painters Academy, where students of all levels can learn to paint, in a second-floor space on Eldridge Street at the edge of Chinatown and the Lower East Side. Its tagline on Instagram is, ''Our classes are free because we pay enough already.''  The aim, he said, is to ''say yes to people who have been said no to'' and who cannot afford art classes otherwise. ''What's a $50 class when you've only got $30 for the week?'' He will run the school, he said, so long as a Kickstarter campaign and assorted donations allow, teaching the classes himself along with guest artists.  Its locale has served as a distribution hub for the New Davonhaime Food Bank, in response to the pandemic -- a very real venture in which Mohammed raises money and delivers food supplies to people in need.  He encourages arts groups to pitch in and back their social justice statements. ''Arts organizations are trying to brown it up, so let's take that money and put it where it's supposed to be,'' he said. ''So that people get to eat -- like, actually eat.''  Their core need, Mohammed said, transcends categories like art or activism.  ''I make home,'' he said. ''That's part of the work.''  Azikiwe Mohammed: 11439 - 39202  Through April 30, Yeh Art Gallery, Sun Yat Sen Memorial Hall, St. John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway, Jamaica, Queens; 718-990-7476; sjuartgallery.org. By appointment.  The artist Azikiwe Mohammed, in his installation as Jimmy, the proprietor of Jimmy's Thrift Store, in the Knockdown Center in Queens, 2017. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Azikiwe Mohammed FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004r "
306		"    'Kill Your Senators' Post Could Put Man in Prison  By Nicole Hong  1,387 words 22 April 2021   23     The trial of Brendan Hunt, an avid Trump backer and New York City resident, will be one of the justice system's first attempts to grapple with the events of Jan. 6.  Two days after the attack on the U.S. Capitol, a 37-year-old man living in New York City posted a video online entitled ''KILL YOUR SENATORS.''  The man, Brendan Hunt, was not in Washington on Jan. 6. But in the 88-second video, he said that ''we need to go back to the U.S. Capitol'' ahead of President Biden's inauguration and ''slaughter'' members of Congress, according to the criminal complaint.  ''If anybody has a gun, give me it,'' he said. ''I'll go there myself and shoot them and kill them.''  Now, the question of whether the video and three other social media posts by Mr. Hunt crossed the line from free speech into illegal threats is at the heart of a federal trial starting this week in Brooklyn.  This is the first federal trial in the country that will force jurors to grapple deeply with the events of Jan. 6, diving headfirst into the national debate about how much the government should police violent rhetoric in the wake of the Capitol attack.  Mr. Hunt became part of the Capitol breach's sprawling aftermath as law enforcement officials not only arrested hundreds of rioters who stormed the Capitol but also charged people with making online threats around the attack. As officials in Washington consider new ways to combat violent extremism, including a possible domestic terrorism statute, Mr. Hunt's trial could be a bellwether of how the authorities balance the pursuit of serious threats with constitutional protections for political speech.  ''These types of threats are particularly dangerous when made in a charged political environment that has already led to the overrunning of the United States Capitol and the interruption, for the first time in United States history, of the certification of a presidential election,'' federal prosecutors in Brooklyn said in a court filing last month.  Mr. Hunt faces one count of threatening to murder members of Congress, which carries a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison. In December, Mr. Hunt posted on Facebook urging a ''public execution'' of prominent Democratic politicians, including the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Chuck Schumer, according to prosecutors.  Mr. Hunt's lawyers have described the case as a groundbreaking prosecution, arguing that the government was trying to criminalize Mr. Hunt's political opinions. Mr. Hunt had no weapons, no plans to carry out violence and no affiliations with organized groups, his lawyers said. He was ranting into the vast internet void, they argue, with no expectation that anyone would act on his words.  ''Seen in context, the posts are more consistent with intoxication than insurrection,'' his lawyers wrote.  Jan Rostal, a federal defender for Mr. Hunt, said in a statement that the First Amendment encouraged political debate ''in the town square, not in secret, so bad ideas can get tested.''  ''This case could have serious implications for freedom of speech on social media,'' Ms. Rostal said.  Although Mr. Hunt had been posting menacing statements on social media since early December, he was not arrested until Jan. 19, the day before Mr. Biden's inauguration. Mr. Hunt has been in jail since his arrest.  The trial will wade into an unsettled area of law that has become especially urgent with the explosion of incendiary political speech in recent years. One of the central disputes at Mr. Hunt's trial will be whether a ''reasonable person'' would have viewed his social media posts as a serious threat to kill members of Congress.  ''The courts have said we've got to leave a lot of room for dissent, including dissent that's raised in violent terms,'' said Eugene Volokh, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. ''But how much room is a very important question.''  To convict Mr. Hunt, prosecutors must prove that he was not just joking or exaggerating. They must show that he made the statements with the intention of either interfering with the official duties of members of Congress or retaliating against them for certifying the 2020 election results.  Prosecutors have said that they may call Capitol Police officers as witnesses to testify about what happened on Jan. 6 and how they reacted to Mr. Hunt's social media posts.  The trial will require jurors to parse through Mr. Hunt's web of political beliefs to understand his motivations. During jury selection, jurors were asked whether they have strong opinions about the 2020 election or about supporters of President Donald J. Trump that would prevent them from being fair and impartial.  Prosecutors will show that Mr. Hunt, a fervent supporter of Mr. Trump, was furious about the outcome of the 2020 presidential election and believed members of Congress were ''traitors'' for supporting an election result that he viewed as illegitimate.  Using Mr. Hunt's social media comments and private text messages, prosecutors will argue that his statements were deliberate threats motivated by white supremacist and anti-Semitic beliefs.  In the video that Mr. Hunt shared two days after the Capitol riot, he used references that are known to white supremacists, prosecutors said. The video was posted on BitChute, a platform with less restrictive moderation policies than YouTube, which has cracked down on the spread of hate speech and conspiracy theories.  In a court filing, Mr. Hunt's lawyers said he removed the video within two days of posting it. It was a ''fellow conservative'' who saw the video on BitChute and alerted the F.B.I., they wrote.  The defense said Mr. Hunt held more nuanced political views than the government's portrayal. He has posted on social media that he voted for President Barack Obama in 2008 and was later involved in the Occupy Wall Street movement, according to a court filing from his lawyers.  ''While we do not agree with many of Mr. Hunt's views, we will fight to the death his right to express them,'' his lawyers wrote.  In December, Mr. Hunt wrote on Facebook describing Mr. Schumer, Ms. Pelosi and Ms. Ocasio-Cortez as the sort of ''high value targets'' that Mr. Trump's supporters should shoot, prosecutors said.  ''They really need to be put down,'' he wrote, according to the complaint. ''These commies will see death before they see us surrender!''  On the social media site Parler, prosecutors said, after another user suggested acting peacefully following the Capitol riot, Mr. Hunt wrote: ''lets go, jan 20, bring your guns #millionmilitiamarch.''  Law enforcement officials have historically been careful about bringing criminal charges hinged solely on speech, often waiting to see if the person making troubling statements online takes concrete steps toward violence. But in the weeks after Jan. 6, prosecutors around the country signaled that they were less willing to wait after witnessing how online rhetoric turned into the real-world violence that unfolded at the Capitol.  During the pandemic, Mr. Hunt had been working from home in Ridgewood, Queens, making about $57,800 a year in his clerical job with the New York State courts system. He was terminated from the job after his arrest.  Mr. Hunt had a long history of promoting conspiracy theories online, including falsely implicating the federal government in a cover-up of the 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School, which killed 20 first graders and six educators.  Mr. Hunt's father is a retired family court judge in Queens.  At a hearing last month, Mr. Hunt's father, John M. Hunt, told the court that after his son graduated from college, he pursued a career in acting and clashed frequently with his mother over his marijuana use. Family disputes sometimes escalated into physical altercations, prosecutors said, to the point where Mr. Hunt's father called on the police to intervene.  The father blamed his son's social media rants on marijuana and alcohol.  ''My son is not a walking time bomb,'' he said in court. ''He's a bright guy. He can be engaging.''  Brendan Hunt in a picture from his BitChute account. (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004m "
307		"    Tempest Storm, 93, Stripper With Enduring Va-Va-Voom  By Margalit Fox  1,281 words 22 April 2021   10     One of the most celebrated strippers of her time, she began her career in burlesque's golden twilight and continued performing into her 80s.  Tempest Storm, one of the most celebrated strippers of midcentury burlesque, who continued plying her craft until she was in her 80s -- not because she had to, but because she could -- died on Tuesday at her home in Las Vegas. She was 93.  Harvey Robbins, her longtime manager, confirmed the death.  Routinely named in the same ardent breath as the great 20th-century ecdysiasts Lili St. Cyr, Blaze Starr and Gypsy Rose Lee, Ms. Storm was every inch as ecdysiastical as they, and for far longer. Almost certainly the last of her ilk, she was, at her height in the 1950s and early '60s, famous the world over, as celebrated for her flame-red tresses as for her vaunted 40-inch bust.  ''Everything you see,'' Ms. Storm proudly told an interviewer in 1975, ''is all mine.''  Playing burlesque stages in New York, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, the Bay Area, London and elsewhere, she was reported to earn $100,000 a year in the mid-1950s (the equivalent of about $950,000 today). Her breasts were said to be insured with Lloyd's of London for $1 million. ''Tempest in a D-Cup,'' the headlines called her; ''The Girl Who Goes 3-D Two Better.''  Visiting the University of Colorado in 1955, Ms. Storm precipitated a riot among eager male students that caused hundreds of dollars' worth of damage -- by doing nothing more than removing her mink coat.  She was seen by still wider audiences in midcentury burlesque performance films, including ''Striptease Girl'' (1952); ''Teaserama'' (1955), which also starred Bettie Page; and ''Buxom Beautease'' (1956).  More recently, she was featured in the documentaries ''Behind the Burly Q'' (2010) and ''Tempest Storm'' (2016).  Along the way she acquired four husbands and many lovers, among whom she said were John F. Kennedy (''He was a great man in everything he did,'' she said) and Elvis Presley (''He really was the King''), while losing, night after night, her mink, gloves, gown, pearls and hat -- though retaining her G-string and fishnet bra, and with them her virtue.  ''I think taking off all your clothes -- and I've never taken off all my clothes -- is not only immoral but boring,'' Ms. Storm told The Wall Street Journal in 1969. ''There has to be something left to the imagination. If you take everything off, you please a few morons and chase all the nice people away.''  She began her career in burlesque's golden twilight, performing to a live band amid clouds of feathers and sequins, with elaborately staged production numbers featuring flocks of chorus girls and punctuated by winking asides from baggy-pants comics.  She continued through the waning of the genre, brought on in the 1960s by television; through its death rattle, sounded amid the feminist sensibilities of the 1970s; and -- against all expectations except, perhaps, her own -- on into the 21st century.  A ''vintage stripper,'' The new_york_times was already calling Ms. Storm in 1973, when, as it turned out, she had more than 40 years to go.  Ms. Storm could scarcely have envisioned a career of such length -- or, for that matter, a career in the field at all -- when she was plain Annie Blanche Banks of Eastman, Ga.  She was born there on Feb. 29, 1928, the daughter of poor sharecroppers soon to be made poorer by the Depression. Her parents' marriage ended before she was born, and after her mother remarried, Annie became the family Cinderella.  ''I never knew my dad,'' she told The Daily News of New York in 1965 in her still-rich Georgia drawl. ''I had three stepsisters and two stepbrothers. And I did all the chores: cookin', cleanin' and bed makin'. All the while I wanted to be a movie star.''  She left home at 14 but got only as far as Columbus, Ga., where she held a variety of jobs, including inspector in a hosiery plant. She married a Marine soon afterward, though the marriage was annulled about a day later. In her midteens she wed a shoe salesman, though that marriage, too, was short-lived.  By the time she was in her late teens she had made her way to Los Angeles, where she found work as a cocktail waitress. A customer told her she ought to be in show business and asked whether she could perform a striptease.  ''I said, 'What is that?''' Ms. Storm recalled in a 2013 interview with The Quad-City Times. ''I was from a small town, I didn't know. He said it was just dancing, but you take your clothes off. I said: 'Oh, no, not me. My mother would disown me.'''  But the man arranged an audition with Lillian Hunt, the choreographer of the Follies Theater in downtown Los Angeles, who put her in the chorus at $40 a week.  A few weeks later, Ms. Hunt offered her a $20-a-week raise if she would strip. She nervously took the stage, wondering whether she could muster the nerve to part company with her gown.  The decision was taken out of her hands when the spotlight hit her and the gown, badly fastened, fell to the floor on its own.  ''That was when I learned the basic rule in this business,'' Ms. Storm told the film critic Roger Ebert in 1968. ''No matter what happens, keep moving.''  For a stripper, the name Annie Blanche Banks lacked a certain je ne sais quoi, and Ms. Hunt gave her a choice of stage names: Sunny Day or Tempest Storm. She chose the more turbulent of the two, and made it her legal name in the late 1950s.  A third marriage, to the owner of a burlesque theater, ended in divorce, as did a fourth, to Herb Jeffries, who sang with Duke Ellington and starred in early Black westerns as a singing cowboy. Her marriage to Mr. Jeffries broke midcentury racial taboos, costing her work. But it was not for that reason, Ms. Storm made clear, that they divorced.  ''A guy marries a girl in this business and he thinks he can handle it,'' she told The Kansas City Star in 2014. ''They love you when you're engaged, but they can't handle it when you're married. All of a sudden they want you to wear dresses all the way up to your neck.''  Ms. Storm's survivors include a daughter, Patricia Jeffries, and a granddaughter.  Through all the years, Ms. Storm kept moving, through the occasional arrests for indecency, through the closing of one burlesque house after another, through a fall onstage in her early 80s in which she broke her hip, through audiences who left in the middle of her act because, in the age of cable TV and the internet, they found it too tame.  She persevered, appearing in Las Vegas nightclubs and at burlesque festivals and nostalgia nights -- her figure as shapely, and her hair as red, as ever.  ''I guess I'd miss it when they stopped looking,'' she told the British newspaper The Independent in 1996, when she was 68. ''So I make sure they do look.''  Alex Traub contributed reporting.  Tempest Storm in 1954 next to a poster for her burlesque act, and in Las Vegas in 2008. She continued performing into her 80s. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GRAPHIC HOUSE/GETTY IMAGES; JAE C. HONG/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Ms. Storm, seen here in the 1950s, always kept something on. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GRAPHIC HOUSE/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004k "
308		"   TIMES INSIDER A Preparing for a Surreal Oscar Night  By Katie Van Syckle  792 words 22 April 2021   2     A Times journalist gives a sneak preview of the Academy Awards on Sunday and offers insights on a changing film industry.  Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.  The coronavirus pandemic reshaped a treasured experience: going to the movies. In theaters. With popcorn and sticky floors. And with other people. On Sunday, the pandemic is expected to remake the 93rd annual Academy Awards, too. The director Steven Soderbergh is among the producers of the show, for one, and though the vast majority of nominees will attend in person, the ceremony will be more intimate, with stars rotating in and out of the main area. Kyle Buchanan, who writes The Projectionist column for The new_york_times and who usually attends the Oscars in person, will be reporting from home this year. Below, he discusses the state of the film industry and what else will be new about the broadcast.  What do the producers have planned for the Oscars this year? How will the awards show be different?  It will be primarily at a different venue, Union Station, and the crowd will be more intimate to adhere to Covid guidelines: Instead of an audience of thousands, only the nominees, presenters and their plus-ones are allowed to attend. It will also be shot in 24 frames per second, rather than the customary 30, to give the show a more cinematic feel. (That lower frame rate is why movies look like movies, instead of like soap operas.) And after months of Zoom ceremonies, it might be nice for a show to look as glamorous as its guests.  My understanding is that, before the pandemic, the months leading up to the Oscars were usually pretty action-packed with lunches, dinners and parties, as producers courted academy voters. How has this changed with Covid? And how has your job changed as a result?  Everything's gone virtual, which is a wan approximation of the awards-season circuit. The buzz doesn't build the same way, the shows and speeches are flatter, and nobody is sticking around to watch a post-screening Q. and A. on Zoom. Studios are still giving it their best try, but I think people are eager to go back to a packed calendar of parties and premieres. I know I am: I miss scanning those ballrooms and bringing you the stories you didn't see on TV.  With theaters closed, it has been an unusual year for the movies. What is the mood in Hollywood right now?  Unsettled. Nobody is quite sure what a return to the movies will look like. For every encouraging sign, like the surprisingly healthy box-office returns of ''Godzilla vs. Kong,'' there's a news story like the closure of the ArcLight theaters in Los Angeles, or Disney's announcement that it will send ''Black Widow'' to its streaming service on the same day it bows in theaters. The movie business definitely won't be the same on the other side of this pandemic.  What will be the biggest difference?  When audiences expect to see new movies like ''Black Widow,'' ''Cruella,'' and ''In the Heights'' on their streaming services, will there still be a strong incentive for them to go to theaters? Studios have claimed that their emphasis on streaming is necessary during the pandemic, but that effectively disguises a corporate mandate to prop up new services like Disney+ and HBO Max by any means necessary. If studios keep sending their best and biggest product straight to streaming, then the theatrical industry is going to significantly contract.  You have an impressive track record when it comes to predicting the Oscar winners. How do you do it?  Good instincts, the ability to talk to lots of voters during the season and a maxim that has always served me well: In a very close race, I usually predict the film I'm less enamored with will win. That way, even if I end up being wrong, I'm happy about the outcome!  What will you miss most on Oscar night?  I'll miss the feeling of being in that room. I'll never forget how the crowd reacted to that historic best-picture win for ''Parasite'' last year: Everyone leaped to their feet, and the roar was the most deafening I'd ever heard at the Oscars. A viewing party with friends certainly has its own charms, but there's no beating the real thing.  The Academy Awards will be broadcast from Union Station, above, and the Dolby Theater. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VALERIE MACON/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00054 "
309		"   FRUGAL TRAVELER  Hoping for a Rental Car Deal? Join the Crowd.  By Elaine Glusac  1,521 words 22 April 2021   5     The pandemic has wreaked havoc in the rental car industry, leading to a shortage of cars and sticker shock for travelers. Here are some tips for finding an affordable one.  On March 31, the day before he moved from San Diego, Calif., to Austin, Texas, Clay Hebert went shopping for a rental car. Before the pandemic, Mr. Hebert, a marketing strategist who frequently travels for work, was used to paying about $400 a week for a rental. To his surprise, Thrifty, Dollar, National and Alamo were sold out, and Hertz wanted $1,212 for a compact Mazda for a week.  ''It seemed like either a typo or a cruel April Fool's joke,'' he said.  Alas, it was neither. Instead, it was evidence of how the pandemic has wreaked havoc in the rental car industry as companies responded to the plunge in travelers by selling off significant portions of their fleets. With travel rebounding over spring break, many travelers who had, before the pandemic, been accustomed to easy-to-find and affordably priced rental cars found themselves frustrated, stranded or gouged.  ''It's not very pleasant for the renter looking forward to vacation and cooped up for a year to find out they have to pay $300 a day for a Kia,'' said Mike Taylor, the senior travel analyst at J.D. Power, a market research company. But he called the crunch a strong indicator for travel's recovery.  With signs that summer travel will be busy -- more than 75 percent of those recently surveyed in a weekly analysis by the market research firm Destination Analysts said they planned to travel in the next three months alone -- the shortage of rental cars is expected to continue, meaning travelers will need to strategize well in advance to secure a vehicle, let alone an inexpensive one, especially in popular resort destinations like Hawaii.  Where have all the rental cars gone?  AutoSlash, a platform that searches for rental car deals, first noticed the rental car shortage over the long Presidents' Day weekend in February, when it said 18 of 20 airports it searched in Florida were sold out of cars, which was rare.  ''We found a combination of a large upsurge in demand from people getting vaccinated and rental car companies that had downsized, leaving them with fewer vehicles to go around,'' said Jonathan Weinberg, the founder and chief executive of AutoSlash.  For 2020, Avis Budget Group, which has the Avis and Budget rental car brands, revenue was down more than 40 percent compared to the previous year and it sold 250,000 vehicles. Hertz, which operates the Hertz, Dollar and Thrifty rental car brands and filed for bankruptcy protection last May, had reduced its fleet about 40 percent by the end of 2020 and recently announced it had secured $4 billion in financing to expand the fleet anew.  The global shortage of microchips, which is slowing car production, may retard that effort.  Enterprise Holdings, which has the Enterprise, Alamo and National car rental brands, said in a statement that it anticipates the surge in demand to continue ''throughout the coming months, especially in pockets of the country popular with travelers. At the same time, there are challenges in vehicle supply, due in part to the recent global chip shortage impacting new vehicle availability.''  How can I get an affordable rental car?  The first step to securing a rental car is shopping early, perhaps even before you book a flight. Through the travel search engine Kayak, I found a weeklong rental for the third week in April in Honolulu at $700 that cost $400 a few weeks later.  Hertz is encouraging ''customers to book as early as possible and at the same time they're making other travel arrangements,'' wrote Lauren Luster, a spokeswoman for Hertz, in an email.  Not every destination is experiencing a shortage of cars, but it's been evident in popular resort areas in Arizona, California, Florida and Hawaii, where it also pays to search beyond airport locations.  The strategy worked for Mr. Hebert, the Austin renter, who was ultimately able to rent from a neighborhood Hertz location, though he was only able to rent a much larger vehicle -- a cargo van -- than he wanted, and paid $159 for a week.  ''If the car rental search engine says the cars are all gone, get crafty,'' said Leigh Rowan, the founder of Savanti Travel, a travel management service, who recommends using Google Maps to search for car rental locations near your hotel or vacation home rental. ''In major tourist spots like Wailea in Maui, there are four different car rental spots walkable from hotels.''  For his own April break on the island of Hawaii, Mr. Rowan had made a reservation with Alamo through Costco -- retail memberships often offer discounts on travel services such as rental cars -- for a minivan to accommodate his group of seven. To ensure it would be there when he arrived, he called the local branch the day before his arrival, explained why he needed the guarantee of a large vehicle and asked for the name of the person who would be working when he arrived.  ''These extra steps are annoying,'' but essential, he said, especially in Hawaii, where the state's Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs told a local television station that it is launching an investigation into the high cost of rentals that have been listed for as much as $600 a day.  In lieu of hunting yourself, you can use AutoSlash, which uses rental car company coupons and discount codes to sort through search results that it says would take consumers considerable time. The free service also uses things like wholesale store and airline frequent flier program memberships and affiliations with organizations like the American Automobile Association and AARP to find deals.  The service then tracks the rental to ensure it remains the best value, emailing travelers to rebook in the event of a price drop.  Alternatives to traditional rental cars  There are, of course, transit alternatives to renting a car, including ride share services, bike share systems and public transportation.  For those seeking the privacy and control of an auto, Turo acts like Airbnb for cars, allowing individuals to list their vehicles for rent on the platform, where choices range from $20-a-day older subcompacts to luxury cars like a Lamborghini in Miami for more than $1,000 a day. Vehicle owners set the terms for things like daily mileage limits.  ''In summer, when we started seeing people getting anxious to get out of their homes, we saw a boom in local travel and local destinations,'' said Andre Haddad, the chief executive of Turo. ''The local travel boom was advantageous to our hosts because people needed cars to get to these destinations and less so planes.''  For Justin Villa and Meagan Malcolm-Peck, Turo is a side gig through which they rent five Jeeps in the Denver area, which cost between $73 and $98 a day (they also have a heavy-duty pick-up truck for $184). After an initial three-month crash at the start of the pandemic, business has been steady with drivers and rental periods have extended beyond weekends. They encourage guests to rent about a month in advance.  Early on ''people were renting locally,'' Mr. Villa said. ''Now most are people coming in from the airport to go to the mountains.''  If you care to bundle the expense of wheels with living space, R.V. sharing services similarly offer lots of choices, though prices have inched up during the pandemic. Outdoorsy, a peer-to-peer rental platform that allows travelers to rent from R.V. owners, has seen average rates rise from $121 a night in 2019 to $161 a night in 2020 based on demand, which soared last year. Second quarter rentals in 2021 compared to the same period in 2019 are up 137 percent.  RVshare, an R.V. sharing service, said rentals for Memorial Day weekend are already up 50 percent compared to last year.  For the desperate, nontraditional sources for rental cars include home improvement stores like Home Depot, which rents trucks designed for do-it-yourselfers to transport supplies, and U-Haul, which advertises truck rentals starting at $19.95 a day.  Zach Whitehead, a software engineer based in Cleveland, was recently on spring break with family in Fort Lauderdale and briefly considered a U-Haul when he couldn't find a standard rental car.  ''I said to my sister, 'I'm assuming you don't want to ride in the back of a box truck,' and she agreed,'' according to Mr. Whitehead, who stuck to Uber for the week.  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places list for 2021 .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jan Buchczik FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004e "
310		"    New York, It's Time To Shop!  By Katherine Bernard and Jon Caramanica  3,050 words 22 April 2021   1     Trees are blooming, vaccines are going in arms, young people in media are quarreling with one another -- after a cold, dark, drained-of-feeling year, New York is re-emerging, puckishly.  A curious shopper may emerge from this long hibernation only to be confronted with oodles of abandoned storefronts. It has been a cruel stretch for established retail, including the closing of several essential New York stores.  And yet, rents are low. The internet has incubated a legion of young brands ready for their first real-world steps. The city feels frisky for the first time in a while. The moment is right for a new wave of entrepreneurs, ideologues, grifters and rabble-rousers to take over the empty spaces and try new things.  Below, a by-no-means-comprehensive sampling of interesting shops that have opened recently, either just before the city shut down or while it was largely asleep, and which altogether proffer a bit of hope for a spirited spring, and beyond.  Antithesis  It remains startling how unambitious New York's men's wear retail is. Almost every new store is really for boys -- graphic T-shirt, painter jacket, work pants, repeat. Thrill-free and fail-safe. Antithesis (1 Rivington Street) is having none -- almost none -- of that. Instead, it concerns itself with unconventional, provocative silhouettes, carrying an extensive range of the tech-wear conceptualist brand Acronym, and also 4SDesigns -- the new line from Angelo Urrutia, late of Engineered Garments -- which lands somewhere between sensualist cowboy and no-wave flâneur.  These are garments that will make you reassess the way you carry yourself when walking down the street, which part of your foot you place weight on, how much attention you pay to the position of your shoulders. What's missing elsewhere is the opportunity to fail. Here, you might fail beautifully. J.C.  Thank You Have a Good Day  The tree branch that runs through the center of Thank You Have a Good Day (392 Van Brunt Street, Brooklyn) functions as commentary and invitation: Tactile things grow here, and you are welcome to find communion with them at a pace no more harried than nature. Many items in the store, which opened in the Red Hook neighborhood in the fall, are handmade and one of a kind, like the radiantly expensive and earnestly beautiful patchwork jackets made of leather, or quilts, or towels. (The store also carries Bode, a spiritual kin brand.)  Everything, from the clothes to the ceramics to the jewelry to the vinegar, looks as if it just left the hands that made it. The responsibility of taking something home from here verges on the moral: Are you responsible enough to bring it out of the store and keep it safe in the cruel world? J.  T.A.  So, you have a re-re-re-re-rescheduled event to attend, and you want to wear something special. Your first stop should be T.A. (332 West 13th Street), the little shop with big endurance (it opened in July 2020) set among empty storefronts and sleepy-sleek big shots in the meatpacking district.  Named for the initials of its owner, Telsha Anderson, it's a concept shop with an array of handpicked brands in a Memphis-level colorful space. The store's collection of ceramics (like noodley bookends by Bi-Rite Studio), posters (Nina Simone looks over the shop) and soothing green walls are the selections of Ms. Anderson herself.  The clothes are arranged not by designer or color but by where they feel right. Christopher John Rogers checkered pants, shiny dyed Ottolinger silk suits and a MRZ plaid blazer-vest with long ties are among the pieces that feel like fresh discoveries. (And surprise -- Ms. Anderson's the saleswoman, too.) K.B.  The Prepandemic Stalwart ...  Bode (58 Hester Street) opened before the pandemic, but in a time of store closings, it has grown, and also become an example of growth itself: a how-to for the kind of sustainable expansion that's about artistry and community.  After a year of hands-off, Bode is the best place to (sanitarily) touch things. Be responsible, don't be a germy menace, but definitely hold a pair of hearty-yet-silky trousers cut from weighty upholstery fabric in your hands. The cut is too distinct for some (see below for the Bode Tailor Shop), but the real fun of pieces cut and sewn from furniture fabric and tablecloths is that wearing Bode is truly bringing the inside out. Finally! K.B.  ... and the Homespun Industrial Corridor It Birthed  So you've spent an hour at Bode -- allowed your fingers to linger on a hand-embroidered shirt, marveled at the stitching on a patchwork jacket, been soothed by the wood tones of the room. Leaving the store can be cruel, an ejection from the artisanal womb.  But one mark of an influential retailer is the community it generates, intended or otherwise. And in the year and a half since Bode opened its doors on the Lowest East Side, small signs of life have been popping up around it, even during the pandemic, helping amplify this neighborhood into a destination beyond lost hours at Clandestino and 20 minutes on the line at Scarr's Pizza.  Up the block on Hester, for at least the next few months, is Leisure Centre (48.5 Hester Street), a collaboration between two Instagram sellers of astutely curated taste: @yobs_sport, a vintage clothing seller offering deep-dive street wear, wonky tees and casual high fashion; and @intramuralshop, which specializes in pop culture ephemera, corporate promo-core, vernacular vintage clothing, tomes about modern design and other accouterments of a richly (and wryly) constructed life.  Around the corner is Sweet Pickle Books (47 Orchard Street), a winningly chaotic small shop that opened in November. The store is skinny and the selection is frenzied -- oodles of titles in biography and travel and an ample art section. But whereas many small used-book stores hone their offerings, the vibe here is more happenstance, as if the owner had just cleared out a few apartments on the Upper West Side that hadn't been touched since ''Annie Hall'' was in theaters. (The store also sells its own line of pickles.)  The energy is pristine at Beverly's (22 Ludlow Street), a new housewares shop founded by Beverly Nguyen, a stylist and creative consultant, that is beginning life as a pop-up. The rest of the stores in the area tend to traffic in ramshackle charm, but Beverly's prefers precision, with items elegantly hung on a pegboard: the perfect pan, the perfect broom, the perfect whisk and so on. The space invites contemplation, both in the meditative sense, and also in the sense of reassessing the inferior items that are undoubtedly littering your/my home.  As you give that thought, walk back around the corner toward the Bode mother ship, but stop at the storefront before it, which was previously the four-decade-strong Classic Coffee Shop but is now Bode Tailor Shop (56 Hester Street), run by Emily Bode and her partner, Aaron Aujla, a furniture designer. In the back, drop off your clothes for mending or hemming (or buy a D.I.Y. repair kit), and in the front, buy a coffee and some jalebi, an Indian sweet. Then, fortified by caffeine and sugar, head back in to Bode for another round. J.C.  Who Are You Anymore?  A year of apartness relieved us of an external gaze, which proved both devastating and enlightening for our previously established aesthetic identities.  If you need a little help re-establishing your existence, stop by Sandy Liang (28 Orchard Street), whose pieces chicly serve as what we used to call ''conversation starters.'' Ms. Liang's pale pink shop (formerly a laundromat) is around the corner from where the designer lives and works and near her family's restaurant. The undulating steel clothing racks made by Almost Studio, her boyfriend's design firm, are inspired by jungle gyms, which will inspire you to play with cute smock shirts, floral fleeces, spandex shirts with anime eyeballs, bleach-dipped denim or a knit polo stitched with a vintage car.  Ms. Liang advises not to work with your significant other on a project -- if you see the store, it's clear the close collaboration was worth it -- but it's a great topic to pose at your first post-vaccination dinner, after you're complimented on your new Sandy Liang earrings. K.B.  Neutrality, we know, is an unacceptable political stance, but what about neutral aesthetics? Is all neutrality a toxic illusion? The short answer is yes. But if you're rich and don't want to be eaten, you can dress like a mix of oatmeal and sand in pieces from the neutral person's neutral store. Jenni Kayne (1082 Madison Avenue) has bleached oak floors and ''uniform necessities'' for jobs like ... what? Whatever. Its cashmere sweaters made in China are $345. Is this harsh? Don't ask me, I'm neutral. K.B.  Basics for Various Non-Basic Lives  Perhaps the persistent pressures of the world have led you to crave a uniform, a set of reliable pieces so perfectly suited to your way of living that you simply need one store that you can return to time and again, keeping your silhouette intact while augmenting it with new shades. A solution that outfoxes the problem.  If you are fastidious about clean lines, high-performance materials and a simpatico relationship with the planet, you'll be home at Nanamica (125 Wooster Street), which opened in SoHo in August. The store, the brand's first outside Japan, is calm and austere. Clothes are hung reverently, like museum pieces. And they hang on the body with dignity, too. Formal casual wear for the artfully inclined.  The shapes are similar, but the materials skew slightly more utilitarian at the just-opened Knickerbocker a few blocks south (357 Canal Street). On offer are elemental pieces that are mindful of the heritage of the first work wear revival -- a time before the Carhartt double-knee resurrection -- while embracing tweaks including intarsia sweaters and chore jackets with unusual-color dye jobs. (The store also has an impressive collection of used design and photography books for sale in a small room at the rear.)  Through all the complications in the denim market in the last decade, 3sixteen (100 Elizabeth Street) has remained steadfastly committed to expertly made jeans in refined takes on classic American silhouettes. The company's new store, in NoLIta, radiates sturdiness. The clothes, inspired by militaria and work wear and motorcycle styles, look as if they're hanging under the power of their own sinew. The shops around it may open and close, the tenor of the neighborhood may evolve, but this is the sort of place that stands graciously still while everything around it swirls.  Sometimes, a hard jolt is appropriate, though. Eric Emanuel (91 Greene Street) broke through in street wear with a simple gesture: producing high-end, made-in-New York basketball shorts and imprinting them with a signature logo of interlocking Es on the left leg. And now, upon those shorts, a small empire is forming. He just opened his first permanent retail location, in the husk of the old A Bathing Ape store in SoHo, where a young Kid Cudi worked and which was a staple in the neighborhood for more than a decade.  Ms. Emanuel has de-glitzed the space and remade it with a basketball-themed fun-house installation in the front window and lockers that decorously display just a couple of pairs of shorts. In the past, when he has tried pop-up retail, lines were the norm. The youth, they will devour this genteel place, so that they might strut away, uniformed. J.C.  Interiority Complex  Quarantine created what could be called an ''interiority complex'' for New Yorkers: a heightened state of awareness of the true purpose and attractiveness of things in our homes. We developed attachments to amazing Instagram sellers whose plush leather seats, cheery rugs, fresh light sources and charming vessels became our new close friends in a long stretch of isolation.  Now it's time to have a talk about monogamy with your pandemic possessions and check out some housewares in person to continue to develop your newfound decorative insight.  Many can say that all they know about designer furniture, they learned on the Lichen Instagram account. That's OK. In fact, Ed Be and Jared Blake, whose aim with Lichen (98 Moore Street, Brooklyn) has been to democratize design, are proud to be a source of knowledge ... and coffee. Being served coffee in a furniture store may sound counterintuitive, but the Lichen linger -- pioneered at the original, smaller Manhattan Avenue location, which remains in business, now affectionately called Lil Lichen -- is in itself an art form. But study well: What you see when you're there is bound to be gone by the next weekend, including rarely seen pieces by Ligne Roset and Alvar Aalto and a bounty of statement chairs, personality-infused floor lamps and harmonious objets.  Coming Soon (53 Canal Street), founded by Fabiana Faria and Helena Barquet, used to be just half a block from its new larger outpost. Though silly-ware and specialty mirrors (Gaetano Pesce, $500) may feel a little overdone (''I do feel like I'm on Instagram,'' a shopper noted inside the store), the sheer joy of immediate attraction to an object is readily available and extremely fun in person. If hand-making curvy candles in your sink didn't go as well as it looked on TikTok, there are plenty to pick up here, along with wiggle-handled glass carafes, a chunky pineapple stool and hand-tufted novelty rugs by Cold Picnic.  The best part about Coming Soon, however, is how everything in the store makes for great gifts. Grab some playing cards for your beach day or hand towels as a hostess gift for friends. Remember friends?  Back in Brooklyn, the Somerset House (76 North Sixth Street), founded by Alan Eckstein, has all the refined vintage investment pieces you realized you couldn't live without but were too nervous to buy over social media. To be fair, ''I bought my Eero Saarinen on Instagram'' doesn't sound as sparkling as you'd like it to now that you can finally entertain guests. Two floors await, filled with shearling side chairs, oblong wooden stools, Italian glass, Danish leather and ideas for those who hope they can get lucky someday at an estate sale. K.B.  Curators of the New Old  There's a new old on the market: The early aughts are now vintage. John Koenig, creator of the Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, invented the term ''anemoia'' to describe the feeling of nostalgia for a time you've never known, and Gen Z has embraced its collective anemoia for the early aughts. Those seemingly recent trends and silhouettes are rushing back, aided by three aughty-anemoia specialty shops in Williamsburg and Greenpoint in Brooklyn.  If you are too tired to scour thrift stores, check out Tired Thrift (10 Bedford Avenue), which has a goofy assemblage of selects inspired by the Greatest Hits of Hilary Duff's 2003 red carpet looks. Low-rise Express jeans, platform wedge sandals with rhinestone straps, Mudd camo-print side-tie capris manufactured at the dawn of the Iraq War ($45), a Hawaiian print tankini ($35) and a New York & Company mini-vest priced for more than it was new ($40) are among the gems here.  To be honest, if you're reading about Tired Thrift in the newspaper and did not first see it on your For You page, these clothes may bring back bad memories. What's the word for disgust for coming-of-age in a late capitalist nightmare?  Lara Koleji (117a Nassau Avenue) is my favorite vintage store in Brooklyn. The floor is purple; I'll try to keep my prose from being the same. The pieces feel collectible and surprising. Things are a little expensive, but you didn't log the necessary hours to find them, so that's the price you pay. I don't want to write about the vintage mulled-wine leather Jil Sander bag in case it's still there. Same goes for the vintage 1990s perfectly worn-in Helmut Lang sweatshirt, which would live so harmoniously with any new Willie Norris Workshop Helmut Language in your closet.  Don't buy the Michael Kors-era Celine leather jacket ($340) or Miu Miu ruffle tote ($285) in case I come back for them. The fashion cycle is too short to live with regrets like these! Embrace the beauty of Y2K style now!  Chickee's Vintage (135 Wythe Avenue) has all the fun you've been longing for since spring 2020. Pick out a colorful checkered knit hat, then find something that will make you feel resurrected, like a Picasso tee or a floor-length Yves Saint Laurent ruffled long-sleeve nightgown. There are lots of pieces with cartoons (Mickey Mouse, Betty Boop), as well as looks with a Lady Di vibe, like Ralph Lauren blazers, a minimal St. John knit dress and a Laura Ashley overcoat. K.B.  Clockwise from top: Sandy Liang on Orchard Street; T.A. on West 13th Street; Beverly's on Ludlow Street; Eric Emanuel on Greene Street; and Thank You Have a Good Day on Van Brunt Street in Brooklyn. (D1); From left: Beverly Nguyen, the owner of Beverly's Home on Ludlow Street; and Bode on Hester Street.; Sweet Pickle Books on Orchard Street.; A collection of conversation starters at Sandy Liang on Orchard Street on the Lower East Side.(D5); Top, clockwise from left: outside and inside 3sixteen on Elizabeth Street; and scenes from Eric Emanuel on Greene Street. Above, from left: Lichen on Moore Street in Brooklyn; and Somerset House on North Sixth Street in Brooklyn. Below, from left: Lara Koleji on Nassau Avenue; and inside and outside Chickee's Vintage on Wythe Avenue in Brooklyn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AMY LOMBARD FOR THE new_york_times) (D6)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004u "
311		"    The Nets May Be Without Harden For the Rest of the Regular Season  By Marc Stein  708 words 22 April 2021   12     A healthy Harden, Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving have barely played together for the Nets.  After a setback for the star guard James Harden in his recovery from a hamstring injury, Nets Coach Steve Nash made the painful admission on Tuesday night that Harden might be sidelined until the start of the N.B.A. postseason next month.  The Nets have had a healthy Harden, Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving all on the court for just 186 minutes this season across seven games since acquiring Harden from the Houston Rockets in a Jan. 14 trade. Even if Harden can come back before the Nets complete their 14 remaining regular-season games, they will be chasing the first championship in the franchise's N.B.A. history with less on-court time together for their three stars than any team of recent vintage regarded a title contender.  ''He'll be back when he's back,'' Nash said. ''That may not be until the playoffs. It may be sooner. I don't know.''  Harden is one of the N.B.A.'s most durable players and played some of the best all-around basketball of his career in his first three months as a Net before missing the Nets' first two games in April with a strained right hamstring. He has missed nine of the Nets' last 10 games; missing seven games with Houston during the 2017-18 season was the previous longest absence of Harden's career. Before their 134-129 victory on Tuesday night in New Orleans, the Nets announced that Harden had suffered a setback during an off-court rehabilitation session on Monday that will keep him out indefinitely.  ''He just felt it,'' Nash said. ''He didn't fall or stumble or anything out of the ordinary. He just felt something maybe in the ballpark of a strain. Then the scan revealed he did suffer a setback. So not much more to it other than just disappointment and that we have to rebuild and get him going again.''  Durant also missed the New Orleans game as he recovers from a thigh contusion he sustained in Miami on Sunday when he absorbed a knee from the Heat's Trevor Ariza. Durant only recently returned to the lineup after missing 23 games with a hamstring strain of his own that brought an abrupt end to his hot start this season in a comeback from the torn right Achilles' tendon that cost him all of last season.  After scoring 32 points in the victory over the Pelicans, Irving acknowledged the growing possibility that the ''reps'' he said he hoped to get alongside Durant and Harden before the playoffs begin may not materialize. ''If we're not able to get that, then we'll have to figure it out,'' Irving said. He added that ''it's not easy to just take games off and come back in -- for anyone.''  Harden last played on April 5, when he left a victory over the Knicks after logging just four minutes. He is averaging 25.2 points, 8.0 rebounds and 10.9 assists as a Net. Durant is averaging 27.3 points, 6.7 rebounds and 5.2 assists but has played in only 24 of the Nets' 58 games.  The Nets were also rocked last week by the sudden retirement of LaMarcus Aldridge, a recent signee and seven-time N.B.A. All-Star. In his 15th season and after just five games with the Nets, Aldridge decided to leave the sport immediately because of an irregular heartbeat.  The new_york_times reported on Monday that the Nets are in advanced contract talks with the former Phoenix and New Orleans guard Mike James, with a signing expected by week's end after James satisfies the league's Covid-19 testing requirements based on its health and safety protocols. After a tumultuous season with CSKA Moscow in Russia, James was recently released from his contract to pursue N.B.A. opportunities.  James Harden, right, with Chris Chiozza, has missed nine of the past 10 games for the Nets. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARY ALTAFFER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00048 "
312		"   ROUNDUP  Oh, So Many Strikeouts: Two Hurlers Set the Pace  By Benjamin Hoffman  1,125 words 22 April 2021   8     Shane Bieber and Corbin Burnes are dominating. The Mets were blown out by the Cubs and the Yankees can't buy a hit.  Even in an era of inflated strikeout numbers, Corbin Burnes of the Milwaukee Brewers and Cleveland's Shane Bieber are putting up absolutely ridiculous numbers.  On Sunday, Bieber matched a record of Nolan Ryan's that has stood since 1978 by striking out 48 batters in his first four starts. On Tuesday, Burnes set a record for starting pitchers by reaching 40 strikeouts without a walk to start the season.  ''You know, I've heard it from everyone in the clubhouse, so it's kind of hard to escape it right now: 'Hey, you set a record tonight,''' Burnes said after Tuesday's masterpiece, which came in a 6-0 win over the San Diego Padres.  While Kenley Jansen, a reliever for the Los Angeles Dodgers, began the 2017 season with 51 strikeouts and no walks, Burnes is already second on the overall list before his next start, which is scheduled for Monday against the Miami Marlins. Burnes's 40 strikeouts with no walks in a span of just four games is a feat without precedent in the modern game -- Jansen's streak came over the course of 31 appearances.  ''I know. I know,'' Burnes said of the record. ''Thanks, and let's move on.''  So far, the 2021 season has continued the trend of rising strikeouts, with an average of 9.4 per nine innings. That rate has increased in nearly every season since 1992, when it stood at just 5.6.  The competition to lead the majors in strikeouts could be fierce. Bieber, who struck out 259 batters in the 2019 season for an average of 10.9 per nine innings, has increased his strikeout rate in each season since. He is leading the A.L. with 14.7 per nine innings thus far in 2021. Burnes, who had an 8.82 earned-run average in 2019, has rebuilt himself into a powerhouse and is striking out 14.8 per nine innings, which trails Jacob deGrom of the Mets (15.8) and Milwaukee's Freddy Peralta (15.5) in the N.L.  In terms of total strikeouts, Bieber (48) and Burnes (40) are the major league leaders, and the leaderboard is filled out by Gerrit Cole of the Yankees (39) and Joe Musgrove of the San Diego Padres (37), who has kept up his strong finish to the 2020 season and recently threw the first no-hitter in San Diego's 53-season history.  Bieber, the American League's reigning Cy Young Award winner, is scheduled to start against the Yankees on Saturday. He would need 11 strikeouts to keep pace with the start to Ryan's 1978 season. Ryan finished that season with 260 strikeouts -- a total that would be eye-popping for most but was just the eighth highest of his career.  Yankees Bats Stay Quiet in Loss  Ian Anderson took a shutout into the seventh inning, Austin Riley homered and the Atlanta Braves scraped by with just four hits to beat punchless Yankees, 4-1, Wednesday night.  Corey Kluber (0-2) kept the Yankees in it with his best start yet in pinstripes, but the team lost for the sixth time in seven games because of a star-studded lineup that has almost entirely spaced out.  Anderson (1-0) limited the Yankees to four hits and four walks in six and two-thirds innings, striking out four against the club he also beat in his major league debut last season. The 22-year-old right-hander threw 97 pitches as temperatures dipped into the low 40s in the late innings.  At 6-11, the Yankees are off to their worst start since 1991. Their 58 runs are fewest in the A.L. and their slugging percentage is the lowest in the major leagues.  Giancarlo Stanton had a 117.3 mph lineout but went hitless, dropping to 3 for his last 34. Gleyber Torres had a hit but is just 4 for his last 32 with one R.B.I. this season. Aaron Hicks is in a 1-for-17 rut, although he walked twice. Clint Frazier blooped a ninth-inning single to break a 1-for-27 slide, picking up his first RBI of the season in his 45th plate appearance.  Gio Urshela -- among the few Yankees swinging the bat well -- was lifted in the top of the eighth with lower back tightness. He ran gingerly to first on an inning-ending double play in the sixth. Manager Aaron Boone said the injury does not appear to be serious and no tests are planned.  The Yankees' pitching has been better, and Kluber (0-2) had his best start since signing an $11 million, one-year free agent deal. He was charged with two runs, two hits and four walks over four and two-thirds innings, throwing 91 pitches. (AP)  Mets Get Blown Out by Cubs  Javier Baez hit a grand slam and the Chicago Cubs took advantage of a season-high four errors by the Mets in a 16-4 romp on a chilly Wednesday night at Wrigley Field.  Baez, who struck out four times Tuesday, scored three runs in this one and hit his sixth career slam off reliever Trevor Hildenberger in the sixth inning. The flashy shortstop became the first player to go 0 for 4 with four strikeouts in one game and then hit a grand slam in the next since Gorman Thomas did it for Milwaukee in the first two games of the 1978 season, according to STATS.  David Bote drove in four runs as the Cubs won their second straight after losing six of eight. Matt Duffy added three R.B.I. and Willson Contreras had two hits and scored twice.  Chicago scored its most runs since putting up 16 against Pittsburgh on Sept. 15, 2019.  Francisco Lindor hit his first homer for the Mets when he connected against Zach Davies in the first. J.D. Davis made it 2-0 with an R.B.I. double in the third, but things turned around in a big way in the fourth.  The Mets committed three errors to match their highest total in an inning since April 16, 2019, at Philadelphia. The Cubs sent 10 batters to the plate and chased David Peterson (1-2) on the way to their most lopsided win of the season.  Milwaukee's Corbin Burnes has fanned 40 without a walk. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GREGORY BULL/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Cleveland's Shane Bieber has averaged 12 strikeouts per start. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL BEATY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00047 "
313		"    Textiles With a Whole New List of Ingredients  By Vanessa Friedman and Elizabeth Paton  1,952 words 22 April 2021   2     Open your fridge and what do you see? The ingredients for a meal or something to snack on. Yet a number of sustainably minded textile entrepreneurs are cooking up something else with Earth Day in mind. Though many are still in the prototype phase, food-related fabrics may be part of the next great fashion frontier. The following is a guide to the fruit and veggies that could end up in your closet.  Coffee Grounds  Increasingly, inventors are finding ways to turn leftover coffee grounds into fabrics. Singtex, a Taiwanese textile company, has created S. Café, a quick-dry polyester yarn made with coffee grounds that is said to offer natural anti-odor qualities and UV protection. The Vietnamese designer Uyen Tran has developed a flexible biomaterial called Tômtex, a leather alternative made from coffee grounds mixed with a biopolymer called chitin that is extracted from seafood shells.  Then there's the German sneaker company nat-2, which is producing shoes with a suede-like upper made from a blend of recycled coffee grounds, coffee beans and coffee plants. And Keen, a footwear company in Oregon, has started using Thai coffee grounds for its midsoles, foot beds and outsoles.  Coconuts  Unlike many edibles-to-wearables in the fridge, it is not the fibers of the coconut that are used in clothing. Rather, the husk -- the hairy, woody rind -- is used to extract activated carbon particles that are then infused into a fabric. Originally known as Cocona, it was rebranded in 2013 as 37.5 (for the ideal centigrade temperature of the human body), and the material helps with odor absorption and UV protection. As a result, it is popular in the active wear industry and used by such companies as Adidas, Bauer and Rossignol.  Soybeans  The first great proponent of soy fabric fashion was ... Henry Ford. Yes, the father of the car assembly line modeled a soy suit for his 78th birthday portrait, and he was so excited about the material possibilities of the legume that he planted thousands of acres of soy to facilitate research and even created a soybean laboratory. His dream was scuppered by World War II, but it has been given new life in the 21st century.  Soybean fabric is made from the hulls of the beans used in the production of tofu, soy milk and soybean oil that have been rendered into a protein slurry and extruded into fiber that is then spun into yarn. It is often called soy cashmere because it is so soft and both light and warm. KD New York offers hoodies, wrap sweaters and T-shirts woven from the fabric, and Madhurima Singh, the founder of Dhuri in Delhi, says that soy fabric creates ''the perfect drape'' for its airy print tops, dresses and jackets.  Pineapple  One of the best known fruit-based fabric alternatives is Pinatex, a leather made from the cellulose fibers of pineapple leaves. Popular thanks to its low cost, suppleness and durability, Pinatex came to market in 2015 and has since been used by H&M, Hugo Boss and Paul Smith. It takes some 460 leaves to make one square meter of fabric, and no extra water, land or fertilizers is involved in its production.  Potatoes  McCain Foods, which markets itself as the world's largest manufacturer of frozen potatoes, provides the raw materials for the bioplastics company known as Chip[s] Board, which in 2019 created Parblex from spud waste. Parblex is now used in prototypes of Cubitts glasses frames and, by the designer Isabel Fletcher, for buttons. The potato plastic has a mottled, tortoiseshell-like look and is biodegradable.  Bamboo Shoots  Bamboo shoots are not simply food for pandas (or canned goods for humans). Fabric manufacturers have been flirting with them for centuries. The first American bamboo fabric patent was registered in 1864 by Philipp Lichtenstadt, though the raw material didn't make it into clothes until the early 2000s. You can understand why people thought it was a good idea, though. Bamboo is plentiful and doesn't need chemicals to sprout like crazy. Also, it is highly effective for carbon sequestration -- capturing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.  Bamboo is now being used to make a variety of fabrics, including bamboo rayon (or viscose), bamboo modal (the kind used in athletic wear) and bamboo linen. All are soft and moisture-wicking, though each finished product involves some chemical treatment of the fiber.  Milk  Milk cotton, also known as milk fiber or casein fiber, is made with the casein protein found in milk. The technology, which has been around since the 1930s, generally involves blending casein with something like acrylonitrile (the chemical used to make acrylic), making milk cotton a semi-synthetic fabric. More recently, companies like QMILK have developed biopolymer variants that are natural and use renewable resources. Because of the healthy and bacteriostatic nature of milk fiber -- it stops bacteria from reproducing -- it is seen as an attractive material alternative for underwear.  Mushrooms  When it comes to replacement leathers, biomaterials made from fungi appear to be leading the way.  In March, Stella McCartney introduced a black bustier top and utilitarian pants made out of Mylo, a material made from mycelium, the networks of threadlike roots from which mushrooms flower. (''Mushroom leather'' can be a slightly deceptive shorthand.)  Ms. McCartney, along with Adidas, Lululemon and Kering, announced a partnership in the fall with Mylo's creator, Bolt Threads, a start-up in California, to invest in the development and production of the leather. Last week, Adidas announced it would be producing a version of its famous Stan Smith sneaker using Mylo.  In addition, Hermès has unveiled a collaboration with MycoWorks, another California start-up, that will bring a version of its Victoria travel bag to market later this year. The Hermès bag is made from a new mycelium material called Sylvania.  None of these items are for sale yet, and many in the industry are keen to stress that it will be some time before fungal textiles are widely available or fully biodegradable. Still, the production takes days, not years, as does raising cattle. It also emits fewer greenhouse gases, consumes less water and results in less use of noxious chemicals than the making of traditional animal leathers.  Grapes  Wine pulp from grape skins, seeds and stems is being made into a leather called Vegea by an Italian company of the same name. Blended with vegetable oil and a water-based polyurethane, the pulp is coated onto cotton, resulting in a vegan leather alternative. While the material is not yet biodegradable and is tricky to recycle, producing it is a way to reduce waste from the wine industry. According to Vegea, roughly 10 liters of wine makes 2.5 kilograms of grape waste, which can be used to make one square meter of wine leather. Vegea is now being adopted by brands like Pangaia to make sneakers.  Oranges  Almost a decade ago, a university student named Adriana Santanocito started thinking about two things Italy was known for: citrus fruits and textiles. Specifically, she wondered if the waste created by industrial production of the first -- all those orange peels left after juicing, a reported 700,000 tons annually in Italy alone -- could be used to create the second.  She teamed up with another student, Enrica Arena, and working with Politecnico di Milano, they developed and patented a process for a fabric made entirely from peels that have been treated to extract the cellulose, which is then spun into yarn: Orange Fiber. In 2014, they founded a company with the same name, based in Catania, and created three prototype fabrics -- a lace silk, a cream-colored satin and a viscose-like material. Fashion started to pay attention.  The company won the Global Change Award from the H&M Foundation. Salvatore Ferragamo and H&M have used Orange Fiber in their collections -- Karolina Kurkova wore an Orange Fiber dress to the 2017 Green Carpet Awards -- and an Orange Fiber look was part of the ''Fashioned From Nature'' exhibition at the Victoria & Albert Museum. Now the biggest hurdle facing the company is scale. Juicy.  Bananas  The average American eats 27 pounds of bananas a year, which leaves a lot of waste for the taking. The silky fibers of banana pseudostems, the part of the plant that looks like a furled piece of paper but later unwraps to become a leaf, have been used to create fabric since 13th-century Japan. Officially known as musa fibers, they are made by stripping apart the sheaths of the stems (a banana plant produces fruit only once) and making the fibers into yarn.  The texture of musa fiber is often compared to silk and cotton, though it is more water-resistant and tear-resistant. In 2019, a company called Bananatex was founded in the Philippines to create a leather-like material with no chemical processes. It has been used in H&M sneakers, among other products, and light summer dresses made from banana fiber are offered by Valani and Milo + Nicki.  Seaweed  A much-vaunted superfood, seaweed is also being talked about as a superfabric. The first explorations of its material properties date back to World War II, but today fabrics like SeaCell and C-Fiber are made from knotted wrack, a bumpy brown algae harvested from the sea off Iceland. The algae is cut every four years, giving it time to regenerate. It is then reduced to a powder and combined with other forms of cellulose like eucalyptus.  Early on, all sorts of not entirely plausible benefits were attributed to seaweed fabrics -- it was said to magically transmit nutrients like vitamin E, calcium and iron to the skin simply through wear -- but its real benefit may be that it is part of a fully biodegradable material.  Fish Scales  Once, in countries like Japan and Canada, Indigenous communities used tanned or dried fish skins to sew into clothing. Now the craft is making a comeback. Salmon leathers can be bought on Etsy and are popular, thanks to their strength and flexibility. On the downside, the skin surfaces of salmon can be small.  This is not an issue with pirarucu leather, made from the scales of a giant freshwater fish found in the Amazon River. Pirarucu are largely farmed for food, and the waste skins are turned into a textured leather. Osklen, a Brazilian luxury label, uses the material for 48 percent of its leather accessories, including tennis shoes, purses and handbags.  Apples  Frumat, made from apple skins and cores, gained attention in 2018 after winning the technology and innovation award at the Green Carpet Fashion Awards in Milan. Last year, Tommy Hilfiger used it for sneakers in his ''Zero Waste'' collection. A cellulose-based material, Frumat can be created in a variety of textures and thicknesses. First, the apple waste is dried and ground to a powder. The powder is then mixed with pigments and a binding agent, spread over a canvas sheet and left until it turns into a material that resembles leather. Like leathers derived from pineapple and grapes, Frumat uses synthetic finishers and binders, so it isn't yet entirely fossil fuel-free and biodegradable.  Karolina Kurkova in an Orange Fiber dress at the 2017 Green Carpet Awards in Milan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACOPO RAULE/GETTY IMAGES); Keen is using Thai coffee grounds for its midsoles, foot beds and outsoles. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA KEEN); Hermès is working on a version of its Victoria travel bag made from a new mycelium material. (PHOTOGRAPH BY COPPI BARBIERI, VIA HERMÈS);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY CENICOLA/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004s "
314		"    Republicans Sharpen Penalties For Protesters in Flurry of Bills  By Reid J. Epstein and Patricia Mazzei  1,798 words 22 April 2021   1     As the nation reacts to the guilty verdict a jury handed to Derek Chauvin in the killing of George Floyd, Republican-led states are introducing punitive new measures governing protests.  Republican legislators in Oklahoma and Iowa have passed bills granting immunity to drivers whose vehicles strike and injure protesters in public streets.  A Republican proposal in Indiana would bar anyone convicted of unlawful assembly from holding state employment, including elected office. A Minnesota bill would prohibit those convicted of unlawful protesting from receiving student loans, unemployment benefits or housing assistance.  And in Florida, Gov. Ron DeSantis signed sweeping legislation this week that toughened existing laws governing public disorder and created a harsh new level of infractions -- a bill he's called ''the strongest anti-looting, anti-rioting, pro-law-enforcement piece of legislation in the country.''  The measures are part of a wave of new anti-protest legislation, sponsored and supported by Republicans, in the 11 months since Black Lives Matter protests swept the country following the death of George Floyd. The Minneapolis police officer who killed Mr. Floyd, Derek Chauvin, was convicted on Tuesday on murder and manslaughter charges, a cathartic end to weeks of tension.  But while Democrats seized on Mr. Floyd's death last May to highlight racism in policing and other forms of social injustice, Republicans responded to a summer of protests by proposing a raft of punitive new measures governing the right to lawfully assemble. G.O.P. lawmakers in 34 states have introduced 81 anti-protest bills during the 2021 legislative session -- more than twice as many proposals as in any other year, according to Elly Page, a senior legal adviser at the International Center for Not-for-Profit Law, which tracks legislation limiting the right to protest.  Some, like Mr. DeSantis, are labeling them ''anti-riot'' bills, conflating the right to peaceful protest with the rioting and looting that sometimes resulted from such protests.  The laws carry forward the hyperbolic message Republicans have been pushing in the 11 months since Black Lives Matter protests against racial injustice swept the country: that Democrats are tolerant of violent and criminal actions from those who protest against racial injustice. And the legislation underscores the extent to which support for law enforcement personnel and opposition to protests have become part of the bedrock of G.O.P. orthodoxy and a likely pillar of the platform the party will take into next year's midterms.  ''This is consistent with the general trend of legislators' responding to powerful and persuasive protests by seeking to silence them rather than engaging with the message of the protests,'' said Vera Eidelman, a lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union. ''If anything, the lesson from the last year, and decades, is not that we need to give more tools to police and prosecutors, it's that they abuse the tools they already have.''  Laws already exist to punish rioting, and civil rights advocates worry that the new bills violate rights of lawful assembly and free speech protected under the First Amendment. The overwhelming majority of last summer's nationwide Black Lives Matter protests were peaceful -- more than 96 percent involved no property damage or police injuries, according to The Washington Post, which also found that police officers or counterprotesters often instigated violence.  Most of the protests held across Florida last summer were also peaceful, though a few in Miami, Tampa and Jacksonville produced some episodes of violence, including the burning of a police car and a sporting goods store. Still, as they embraced the bill that Mr. DeSantis signed into law, Republican leaders expressed scorn for cities that trim police budgets and tolerate protesters who disrupt business and traffic.  ''We weren't going to allow Florida to become Seattle,'' said Chris Sprowls, a Republican who is the speaker of the Florida House, mentioning cities where protests lasted for months last year and demonstrators frequently clashed with the police. ''We were not going to allow Florida to become Portland.''  The Florida law imposes harsher penalties for existing public disorder crimes, turning misdemeanor offenses into felonies, creating new felony offenses and preventing defendants from being released on bail until they have appeared before a judge. A survey conducted in January by Ryan D. Tyson, a Republican pollster, found broad support in the state for harsher penalties against protesters ''who damage personal and business property or assault law enforcement.''  But the law goes farther. If a local government chooses to decrease its law enforcement budget -- to ''defund the police,'' as Mr. DeSantis put it -- the measure provides a new mechanism for a prosecutor or a city or county commissioner to appeal the reduction to the state.  The law also increases penalties for taking down monuments, including Confederate ones, making the offense a second-degree felony punishable by up to 15 years in prison. It makes it easier for anyone who injures a protester, such as by driving into a crowd, to escape civil liability.  State Senator Shevrin D. Jones, a Democrat from Broward County and a vocal critic of the law, noted that Mr. DeSantis had been quick to emphasize how necessary the bill was the day after the deadly Jan. 6 riot at the U.S. Capitol but had made no mention of that event during Monday's bill signing, focusing solely on the summer protests.  That was evidence, he said, that bills aimed at punishing protesters were disproportionately targeting people of color. ''This bill is racist at its core,'' Mr. Jones said.  So far, three bills aimed at limiting protests have been signed into law -- Florida's and new laws in Arkansas and Kansas that target protesters who seek to disrupt oil pipelines. Others are likely to come soon.  In Oklahoma, Republican lawmakers last week sent legislation to Gov. Kevin Stitt that would criminalize the unlawful blocking of a public street and grant immunity to drivers who strike and injure protesters during a riot. Last June, a pickup truck carrying a horse trailer drove through a crowd of Black Lives Matter protesters on a Tulsa freeway, injuring several people and leaving one paralyzed. The driver, who said he had sped up because he feared for the safety of his family, was not charged.  The bill's author, State Senator Rob Standridge, said the Tulsa incident had prompted him to seek immunity for drivers who strike protesters. He said Tuesday he wasn't aware of any drivers who had been charged after striking protesters in Oklahoma. ''My hope is that this law never is utilized,'' he said in an interview. Carly Atchison, a spokeswoman for Mr. Stitt, declined to say whether he would sign the bill, which passed with veto-proof majorities.  Tiffany Crutcher, whose twin brother, Terence Crutcher, was shot and killed in 2016 by a Tulsa police officer who was later acquitted on a manslaughter charge, said the Oklahoma proposal represents Republican efforts to extend the Trump administration's hostility toward people of color.  Dr. Crutcher said she was convinced that if Mr. Stitt signed the legislation, it would be applied in harsher terms against those protesting racial injustice than for white protesters demonstrating for gun rights or against abortion.  ''We all know that over the last four years that we saw white supremacy, bigotry and racism show its ugly head in so many forms,'' said Dr. Crutcher, who quit her job as a physical therapist to work for racial justice after the death of her brother. ''This is the continuation of the Trump administration that showed us every day that Black lives didn't matter.''  While Republican lawmakers present the anti-protest legislation as support for the police, law enforcement agencies don't necessarily back the new proposals.  The Iowa bills, part of a law enforcement package proposed by Gov. Kim Reynolds, would strip local governments of state funding if cities and counties defund their own law enforcement budgets -- something that no Iowa jurisdiction has sought to do. And state lawmakers cut a proposal by Ms. Reynolds to track police-stop data by race.  The state's police departments didn't ask for new tools to crack down on protesters or grant immunity to drivers who strike protesters marching in streets, said Kellie Paschke, a lobbyist for the Iowa Peace Officers Association, an umbrella group for the police.  In Kentucky, where protests following the police killing of Breonna Taylor lasted for months last year, the State Senate passed a bill that would make it a crime to insult or taunt a police officer with ''offensive or derisive'' words or gestures that would have ''a direct tendency to provoke a violent response.'' The measure would have required that those arrested on such a charge be held in jail for at least 48 hours -- a provision that does not automatically apply to those arrested on murder, rape or arson charges in Kentucky.  Though the legislation died in the statehouse over bipartisan concerns about free speech, the bill's lead sponsor, State Senator Danny Carroll, a Republican who is a retired police officer, said he planned to refile it next session. Mr. Carroll said the bill was needed to ensure community safety and protect law enforcement personnel.  ''They are under attack constantly,'' he said, noting that police officers decades ago could ''arrest someone for cussing them out,'' until court rulings curtailed such police powers.  In the hours after Mr. DeSantis signed the Florida bill on Monday, as the nation awaited the Chauvin verdict, progressive community organizers in the state worried about how law enforcement agencies might react to any protests that resulted from the decision. Moné Holder, senior director of advocacy and programs for Florida Rising, a social justice organization, said her team had spent a lot of time informing activists of their rights under their new law.  ''It's a tactic to silence our voices,'' she said.  After the verdict was announced, she remained concerned about how the police would deal with community members if they chose to gather outside, to be together after an emotional year.  ''To console each other, to cry, to grieve,'' she said. ''The fact that we have to think twice about that is troublesome.''  Dan Levin contributed reporting.  In Minnesota, where protesters marched Monday in Minneapolis, top, a bill would prohibit those convicted of unlawful protesting from getting student loans, or unemployment or housing assistance. Above left, a rally in Miami last year. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida signed what he has called ''the strongest anti-looting, anti-rioting, pro-law-enforcement piece of legislation in the country.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times; CRISTOBAL HERRERA/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK; PHIL SEARS/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A18)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004c "
315		"    As Putin Taunts the West, Russians Taunt Putin  By Andrew E. Kramer  1,371 words 22 April 2021   1     In a state-of-the nation speech, President Vladimir Putin warned of a ''fast and tough'' response to security threats, in a message seemingly aimed at President Biden and delivered amid large protests.  MOSCOW -- He warned ominously of ''red lines'' in Russia's security that, if crossed, would bring a powerful ''asymmetric'' response. He reminded Western leaders once again of the fearsomeness of his country's modernized nuclear arsenal. And he boasted of Russia's moral superiority over the West.  Yet even as President Vladimir V. Putin lashed out at foreign enemies real or perceived in a state-of-the-nation speech on Wednesday, tens of thousands of Russians defied a heavy police presence to pour into the streets to challenge his rule. In Moscow, some gathered across the street from the Kremlin to chant, ''Go Away!''  It was a snapshot of Russia in the third decade of Mr. Putin's rule: a leader facing an increasingly angry and desperate opposition but firmly in power with his country's vast resources and huge security apparatus at his disposal.  Faulted for a lagging response to the coronavirus and with his popularity ratings declining, though still high, the Russian leader used the address to outline a vision for Russia as it emerges from the pandemic, one that promised numerous new economic subsidies but was silent about political rights.  And in recent weeks, he has seemingly fallen back on a tried and true tactic to bolster his fortunes: fanning nationalist flames.  He has ordered an enormous troop buildup on Russia's border with Ukraine and has gone toe to toe with President Biden, who issued a new round of sanctions last week, undeterred by Mr. Putin's saber rattling in Ukraine.  Mr. Putin portrayed Russia as harried by Western nations for years with hypocritical criticism and sanctions. Punishing Russia, he said, has become a ''new sport'' in the West, and he was running thin on patience.  While he pledged on Wednesday that he still wanted ''good relations with all participants of international society,'' he said that if Russia is forced to defend its interests from any security threats its response would be ''fast and tough.''  But there were signs that a public wearied after two decades of Mr. Putin's rule was increasingly tuning him out. That was evident on the streets of Russia's cities Wednesday evening, as rallies to protest the prison treatment of the prominent opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny seemed to be mushrooming into something more.  Chanting ''Freedom for political prisoners!'' and ''Down with the czar!'' demonstrators gathered across Russia's 11 time zones, a showing that mirrored the nationwide turnout at a wave of protests in January.  Thousands were arrested at those protests this winter, which came after Mr. Navalny's return to Russia from Germany, where he had been treated for a poisoning with a chemical weapon.  Riot police officers were out in force on Wednesday. While it appeared that they sought to avoid scenes of brutality that could cast a shadow over Mr. Putin's speech, the police did detain nearly 1,500 demonstrators nationwide.  Protesters stood on the sidewalks across the street from the exhibition hall next to the Kremlin where Mr. Putin had spoken a few hours earlier. They chanted ''Go away!'' -- referring to Mr. Putin; and ''Release him!'' -- referring to Mr. Navalny.  ''I didn't come out concretely because of Aleksei Navalny, I came out more for myself,'' said Svetlana Kosatkina, a 64-year-old real estate agent. ''I can't stand this whole situation of lawlessness and just total humiliation.''  On a hunger strike and said by his lawyer to be near death, Mr. Navalny this week wrote in a letter to his allies that he had grown so thin he resembled a ''skeleton walking, swaying in his cell.''  Police detained dozens of opposition activists earlier on Wednesday, including Mr. Navalny's spokeswoman, Kira Yarmysh, and a top lieutenant in his political organization, Lyubov Sobol. To curb turnout at protests, universities compelled students to sit for unscheduled exams, TV Rain, an independent news station, reported on Tuesday.  Mr. Putin's speech was closely watched for hints of his intentions in Ukraine, after massing the largest military force on the border since the outset of Kyiv's war with Russian-backed separatists seven years ago.  Mr. Putin made no reference to the military buildup near Ukraine, but he had plenty of words for Western leaders, presumably aimed mostly at Mr. Biden.  ''The organizers of any provocations threatening the fundamental interests of our security will regret their deeds more than they have regretted anything in a long time,'' Mr. Putin told a hall of governors and members of Parliament. ''I hope no one gets the idea in their head to cross the so-called red line with Russia -- and we will be the ones to decide where it runs in every concrete case.''  While Mr. Putin's rally-around-the-flag remarks on security grabbed the most attention, he devoted the bulk of his address to domestic concerns, listing a raft of new social programs, such as subsidies for children's summer camps and child support for single parents.  Russia, Mr. Putin asserted, weathered the coronavirus pandemic better than other nations. He outlined plans to shore up the medical system, including by sending new diagnostic equipment to hard-hit regional hospitals. He made no mention of the death toll in Russia, which by some estimates has been the highest per capita in the world.  ''For our entire history, our people triumphed, overcoming challenges thanks to their singular cohesion, their spiritual and moral values that in a number of countries are forgotten, but we on the contrary have strengthened,'' Mr. Putin said.  The speech came as the first, lengthy retort to the Biden administration's imposition of sanctions against Russia this month. Those were intended to penalize Russia for numerous past actions, including its meddling in United States elections, the ''Solar Winds'' hacking of government agencies and corporations, various disinformation efforts and earlier military interventions in Ukraine.  Mr. Putin's allies had also erupted in fury when President Biden in an interview last month agreed with a characterization of Mr. Putin as a ''killer.'' In Wednesday's speech, Mr. Putin lingered on a grievance that has not gained much traction outside Russian state news media: an accusation that the C.I.A. had been plotting an assassination of its own, targeting President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, the leader of Belarus, a Russian ally.  Over the weekend, Russia's domestic intelligence agency, the Federal Security Service, arrested two men who it said had coordinated with American and Polish intelligence agencies to plot the murder of Mr. Lukashenko. This, Mr. Putin said, ''crossed all the boundaries.''  In Mr. Putin's telling, Russia, far from pursuing a militaristic policy, has been the victim of a Western scheme to contain and hobble the country. ''They attack Russia here and there without any reason,'' Mr. Putin said. He cited Rudyard Kipling's novel ''Jungle Book'' with a comparison of the United States to Shere Khan, a villainous tiger, nipping at Russia.  And Mr. Putin lingered on descriptions of Russia's modernized arsenal of atomic weapons. These include a hypersonic cruise missile, called the Dagger, and a nuclear torpedo, called the Poseidon. The torpedo, Russian officials have said, is designed to set off a radioactive tsunami.  The foreign policy message was a stark warning, said Andrei A. Klimov, deputy chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs in the Russian Senate.  ''We aren't joking any longer,'' Mr. Klimov said. ''''We won't every day tell our opponents they will be punished. But when it comes, they will understand.''  Anton Troianovski contributed reporting from Kyiv, Ukraine and Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow.  A rally urging the release of the opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny in Moscow on Wednesday. (A1); An image of President Vladimir Putin, with quotations from his state-of-the-nation speech, was shown Wednesday. Supporters of Aleksei A. Navalny gathered in Moscow, as did the riot police. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE new_york_times) (A10)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004g "
316		"    Carl Spielvogel, 92, Visionary Half of an Advertising 'Odd Couple,' Dies  By Robert D. McFadden  1,502 words 22 April 2021   11     A former newspaper columnist, he climbed the ladder at one big firm, founded his own, then rose again through mergers to the top of a global agency.  Carl Spielvogel, a marketing wunderkind on Madison Avenue, resigned in 1979 as vice chairman of one of the world's largest advertising conglomerates, the Interpublic Group of Companies. One step away from the brass ring that had been his dream for nearly 20 years, he had been passed over for the chairmanship.  At a crossroads, he stepped back for a long look. He was already 50, a still-ambitious former reporter who had quit a newspaper job that many journalists might covet as a career triumph -- advertising columnist for The new_york_times -- and who had then risen in advertising nearly to the top, only to again quit.  At loose ends, he played tennis. Talked to old friends. Traveled to China.  ''I had an amicable parting from Interpublic, after 20 years of blood, sweat, tears and triumphs, and the rewards were terrific,'' he told the trade magazine Advertising Age in 1984. ''But I just felt it was time to do something else.''  Then he got a call from Bill Backer, a friend who had recently resigned as vice chairman of McCann-Erickson, Interpublic's largest agency, where Mr. Spielvogel had begun in advertising. He had some ideas to discuss.  Within weeks, Backer & Spielvogel was founded.  It had no staff, no office, no clients, only an idea: In the age of the global superagency, born of many mergers, it would be something new -- a miniature superagency run by seasoned corporate executives with the clout and experience to handle a small number of blue-chip clients who would receive personal attention from an agency owner.  ''It rocked the industry,'' Mr. Spielvogel said in a 2017 interview for this obituary. ''It had none of the disadvantages of being big -- the cost overruns, the endless meetings, the distant relationships among agency and client people. And it had all the advantages of being small -- the flexibility to be imaginative, real personal service, control over the budgets and, above all, the freedom to have fun.''  He died on Wednesday at 92, at a hospital in Manhattan, said Deborah Bershad, the assistant of his wife, Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel.  Within three months of its founding, Backer & Spielvogel had landed its first account, Miller beer, with $85 million in annual billings -- and a 15 percent commission for B & S. Miller had left Interpublic and joined the partners' new agency, drawn by its owners' proven success. In their old jobs, Mr. Spielvogel had managed marketing and Mr. Backer had handled the creative side of the Miller campaign.  That campaign had been based on one idea: that blue-collar workers drank most of the beer in America. Focusing on that audience, the ads featured hard hats and laborers settling down for a few cans of Miller after work. ''It's Miller Time,'' the voice-over said. Sales popped like champagne corks. Miller Lite, introduced in 1975, became ''everything you ever wanted in a beer ... and less.''  ''We were known on Madison Avenue as 'the odd couple,''' Mr. Spielvogel recalled. ''Bill Backer was the patrician, with his bow ties and South Carolina drawl, and I was the streetwise Brooklyn guy. But we had a rule. If we ever had a disagreement, we would close the door, sit down and resolve it. That kept office politics out of the agency.''  Mr. Backer, who died in 2016, was known especially for his Coca-Cola campaign at McCann-Erickson. A lapsed lyricist, he had co-written the hymn ''I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing (in Perfect Harmony),'' which he turned into, ''I'd Like to Buy the World a Coke and Keep It Company.'' He also coined slogans, like ''Things go better with Coke.''  Backer & Spielvogel did not seek traditional small-agency start-up accounts. Rather, they took big-name clients away from giant rivals. They also picked up four more partners from Interpublic or McCann-Erickson. The six principals resolved to limit their client list to 15, and agreed that their ads should build the personality of each client, not the agency's.  By 1981, Backer & Spielvogel had nine clients, including Campbell's Soup, with $20 million in billings, and the Paddington Corporation (J & B Rare Scotch), another $20 million. More were added later, including Seven-Up, Helene Curtis, Philip Morris, Quaker Oats, NCR Corporation, Hyundai, Arby's and Magnavox.  The agency had 650 employees by 1984. But the magic of a small agency with big ambitions lasted for little more than six years. It began to feel the limitations of its size, became a victim of its own success and was soon engulfed in a new cycle of mergers. In 1986, the agency was bought by the British company Saatchi & Saatchi for more than $100 million ($56 million down and $45 million paid over six years), and in 1987 it merged with Ted Bates Worldwide.  Mr. Spielvogel became chairman and chief executive of the new firm, serving from 1987 to 1994. In 15 years, he had come full circle, from No. 2 at Interpublic, with 8,800 employees in 51 countries and billings of $443 million, to No. 1 at Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, which on his watch grew into the world's third largest ad agency, with 8,500 employees, 178 companies in 55 countries and billings of $450 million.  In the 1990s, BSBW ran into trouble, losing Xerox, Prudential Insurance, Dole and even Miller Lite, accounts with combined billings of $215 million. Mr. Backer retired in late 1993. Mr. Spielvogel resigned months later to become chairman and chief executive of the United Auto Group, the nation's largest publicly owned auto dealership organization.  In 1997, in what he called a fourth career, he founded Carl Spielvogel Enterprises, a global investment and marketing company. Except for an eight-month period in 2000 and 2001, when he was the Clinton Administration's ambassador to Slovakia, he ran the company until 2009, when he gave up its daily operations to focus on board work for many corporate, civic and cultural institutions.  On his office wall during much of his career, he kept an Arthur Rothstein photograph of an old man sitting in front of a savings bank with his shoeshine kit. Behind him, in the bank's window, a sign read: ''The secret of success in life is for a man to be ready for his opportunity when it comes.''  Carl Spielvogel was born on Dec. 27, 1928, in Brooklyn, the youngest of three children of Joseph and Sadie (Tellerman) Spielvogel. His father owned a chemical company, and his mother was a homemaker. Carl and his siblings, Morris and Rose, attended public schools in Brooklyn. Carl graduated with honors from Boys High School in 1946.  While working various jobs -- as a copy boy and clerk at The Times from 1950 to 1953, among others -- he attended the City College School of Business at night for four years and by day for two years. He graduated in 1953 from the newly renamed Baruch School of Business.  That year, he married Roslyn Bremer, a high school teacher. They had three children, David, Rachel and Paul, and were later divorced. In 1981, he married Barbaralee Diamonstein, an author and civic activist. He lived in Manhattan.  He is survived by his wife along with two of his children, David and Rachel, and three grandchildren. His son Paul died in 2011.  Mr. Spielvogel was in the stateside Army from 1953 to 1955. After his discharge, he returned to The Times as a financial news reporter and wrote several exclusives, including one about rain insurance for Coney Island merchants, that won awards from The Times's publisher.  From 1957 to 1960, he wrote the newspaper's six-day-a-week advertising column, churning out insights about how and why campaigns were designed and executed. The columns became required reading -- and their author something of a celebrity -- on Madison Avenue.  In 1960, Marion Harper Jr., the visionary adman who was president of McCann-Erickson and later built Interpublic, hired Mr. Spielvogel as a public relations man. Under his wing, Mr. Spielvogel rose through the executive ranks and in 1972 was elevated to the parent company, Interpublic, where he eventually became vice chairman.  Being passed over for the company chairmanship was a disappointing but life-changing experience, Mr. Spielvogel recalled. ''It opened the door to Backer & Spielvogel,'' he said, ''and the most wonderful experiences I had in advertising.''  Carl Spielvogel in 2006, left, and above next to Mayor David N. Dinkins at a breakfast with New York business leaders in 1993. A ''streetwise Brooklyn guy,'' as he put it, he reached pinnacles on Madison Avenue and for a time was ambassador to Slovakia. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PATRICK MCMULLAN VIA GETTY IMAGES; CHESTER HIGGINS JR./THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004i "
317		"    Monte Hellman, 91, Director Who Used Road as a Set, Dies  By William Grimes  1,398 words 22 April 2021   10     Originally part of Roger Corman's army of hungry young actors and filmmakers, he made terse action movies and became a hero of the American independent film movement.  Monte Hellman, whose terse action films, epitomized by the 1971 road movie ''Two-Lane Blacktop,'' made him a cult hero of the American independent film movement, died on Tuesday in Palm Desert, Calif. He was 91.  His death was confirmed by his daughter, Melissa, who said he had been admitted a week before to Eisenhower Health Hospital after a fall at his home.  Mr. Hellman was the virtually unknown director of several low-budget films for Roger Corman, most of them with Jack Nicholson in a starring role, when Esquire magazine put ''Two-Lane Blacktop'' on the cultural map.  In an act of cultural provocation, Esquire devoted most of its April 1971 issue to the film, about a cross-country car race. The cover showed a young woman hitchhiking on a desolate stretch of road, with two muscle cars just visible in the distance behind her, poised to race. ''Read it first!'' the magazine's cover trumpeted. ''Our nomination for the movie of the year: 'Two-Lane Blacktop.'''  Inside, the editors ran the movie's entire script, written by the underground novelist Rudy Wurlitzer from an idea by Will Corry, who was also given screenwriting credit. It was a series of laconic verbal exchanges between obscurely motivated characters identified only as ''The Driver'' (played by the singer James Taylor), ''The Mechanic'' (Dennis Wilson of the Beach Boys), ''the Girl'' (Laurie Bird) and ''G.T.O.'' (Warren Oates), named for his car.  Sample dialogue:  G.T.O.: ''Well, here we are on the road.''  The Driver: ''Yeah, that's where we are, all right.''  The film, shot entirely on locations from Arizona to Tennessee, has been called the ultimate American road film.  ''Their universe is one that's familiar in recent American films like 'Bonnie and Clyde,' 'Easy Rider' and 'Five Easy Pieces,''' the critic Roger Ebert wrote in The Chicago Sun-Times. ''It consists of the miscellaneous establishments thrown up along the sides of the road to support life: motels, gas stations, hamburger stands. The road itself has a real identity in 'Two-Lane Blacktop,' as if it were a place to live and not just a way to move.''  Made for $850,000, and intended to capitalize on the runaway success of ''Easy Rider,'' ''Two-Lane Blacktop'' struggled at the box office after Lew Wasserman, the head of Universal Studios, refused to promote it. Esquire sheepishly included its endorsement of the film in its annual Dubious Achievement Awards.  ''We thought it was good publicity,'' Mr. Hellman said of the Esquire issue in an interview with The Los Angeles Times in 1999, when ''Two-Lane Blacktop'' finally made it to video. ''In hindsight, we wouldn't have done it. I think it raised people's expectations. They couldn't accept the movie for what it was.''  French film critics did, and their enthusiasm spread to the United States. As the 1970s became recognized as a golden age of independent film, the film's reputation, and its director's, soared. In 2005, the journal Cahiers du Cinéma pronounced it ''one of the greatest American films of the 1970s.''  Monte Himmelbaum was born in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, on July 12, 1929, and grew up in Albany, N.Y., where his father ran a small grocery store. When he was s6, the family moved to Los Angeles.  He majored in speech and drama at Stanford University, where he directed radio plays, and after graduating in 1951, he studied film at the University of California, Los Angeles. Around this time, he changed his last name.  In 1952, Mr. Hellman helped found the Stumptown Players, a summer theater troupe, in Guerneville, Calif. Carol Burnett was a member. He directed numerous productions and filled in as an actor when required.  His first marriage was to one of the theater's actresses, Barboura Morris. The marriage ended in divorce. He was married three other times, his daughter said. In addition to his daughter, he is survived by a son, Jared, and a brother, Herb.  In 1955, he moved to Los Angeles, where he began working as a film editor at ABC Studios and on the television series ''The Medic.'' Still drawn to the theater, he founded a new troupe, the Theatergoers Company. The company staged the Los Angeles premiere of Samuel Beckett's ''Waiting for Godot,'' which Mr. Hellman presented as a western.  After the company's theater was converted into a cinema, Mr. Corman, one of the company's investors, invited Mr. Hellman to direct a low-budget horror film, ''The Beast From Haunted Cave,'' which Mr. Hellman later described as ''a bit like 'Key Largo' with a monster.''  As part of Mr. Corman's loose army of young and hungry actors and filmmakers, Mr. Hellman helped edit the biker films ''The Wild Ride,'' during which he became friends with Mr. Nicholson, and ''The Wild Angels.'' He directed part of ''The Terror'' with Francis Ford Coppola and the opening sequence of Mr. Coppola's ''Dementia 13,'' in which a hypnotist warns that audience members with a weak heart should not watch the film.  His contribution to ''The Terror'' caught the attention of Robert Lippert, an executive at 20th Century Fox, who sent him to the Philippines with Mr. Nicholson to make ''Back Door to Hell,'' a war film, and the adventure thriller ''Flight to Fury,'' whose screenplay Mr. Nicholson wrote.  Mr. Hellman reunited with Mr. Nicholson on two existential westerns, shot in six weeks in the Utah desert, that have added luster to his résumé. ''They are sparse, austere, stripped of all necessary language, stripped and flayed until there is nothing left but white bones drying in the sun,'' Aljean Harmetz wrote of the films in The new_york_times in 1971.  ''Ride in the Whirlwind,'' with a script by Mr. Nicholson, told the story of three cowhands who find themselves on the run after encountering a gang of bandits wanted for murder. In ''The Shooting,'' written by Carole Eastman, who later wrote the script for ''Five Easy Pieces,'' a former bounty hunter played by Mr. Oates pursues a mysterious figure on the run, dogged along the way by a sinister gunslinger played by Mr. Nicholson.  ''I had to shoot from the hip,'' Mr. Hellman told Uncut magazine in 2003. ''It became a way of life after that. I got confidence in myself. I felt I could walk onto a set and the set would tell me what to do.''  Mr. Hellman made his last film for Mr. Corman, ''Cockfighter,'' in 1974 and worked sporadically thereafter, while teaching in the film directing program at the California Institute of the Arts. He directed the noir western ''China 9, Liberty 37'' (1978), with Mr. Oates and, in a rare acting role, the director Sam Peckinpah, and the Conradesque ''Iguana.'' When the director Paul Verhoeven fell behind schedule on the 1987 film ''RoboCop,'' Mr. Hellman was called in to do the action scenes.  He returned to his beginnings in the horror genre with the 1980s slasher film ''Silent Night, Deadly Night 3: Better Watch Out!'' before staging a comeback of sorts with the neo-noir ''Road to Nowhere'' in 2010.  That film won a Special Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. The award was presented by Quentin Tarantino, who introduced Mr. Hellman as ''a great cinematic artist and a minimalist poet.'' Mr. Hellman had been an executive producer of Mr. Tarantino's breakthrough film, ''Reservoir Dogs.''  ''I have a reputation for 'fighting the system,' 'not selling out,' 'doing my own thing,' etc.,'' Mr. Hellman told the reference work World Film Directors in 1987. ''In reality, I have always been a hired gun. I have usually taken whatever job came my way.''  Yan Zhuang contributed reporting.  Yan Zhuang contributed reporting.  Monte Hellman right, in 2011, one year after the neo-noir ''Road to Nowhere'' won a Special Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. Mr. Hellman's ''Two-Lane Blacktop,'' starring Warren Oates, above from left, Dennis Wilson, Laurie Bird and James Taylor, is considered ''one of the greatest American films of the 1970s.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL OCHS ARCHIVES, VIA GETTY IMAGES; MICHAL CIZEK)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00043 "
318		"    Disagreements Emerge Among the Republicans Pushing Voting Limits  By Jeremy W. Peters  1,596 words 22 April 2021   18     Trump-friendly state lawmakers trying to enact new voting laws are facing pockets of opposition from fellow Republicans who argue that some measures go too far or would hurt the party's own voters.  John Kavanagh, a Republican state representative in Arizona, recently ran through a list of what he called ''bad election bills that were introduced by Republicans.''  One would have allowed the Legislature to overturn the results of a presidential election even after they had been certified. Another would have required that early ballots be dropped off only at drop boxes that are attended. A third would have repealed the state's hugely popular permanent early voting list, which allows voters to receive a ballot in the mail for every election.  All three measures were also stopped by Republicans in Arizona, even as the party pushes other bills that would enact tighter regulations on early voting in the state -- just a few months after President Biden became the first Democratic presidential candidate since 1996 to carry the Southwestern battleground.  This G.O.P. resistance to certain voting legislation reflects an awkward and delicate dance within the party: As state lawmakers loyal to former President Donald J. Trump try to please him and his supporters by enacting new voting limits across the country, they are facing pockets of opposition from other Republicans who argue that some of the bills go too far or would hurt their own voters.  These Republicans see themselves as moderating forces on bad bills. And they are instead proposing less stringent measures that they say will improve the efficiency and security of early voting now that so many more people are using it because of changes brought about by the coronavirus pandemic. They acknowledge, however, that their timing is bad. Pushing for any bill that includes new requirements for voting after an election that went more smoothly than many expected raises an inevitable question: Why now, if not to try to thwart Democrats?  The number of Republicans willing to speak out is modest compared with the many Trump-friendly lawmakers in G.O.P.-controlled state capitols who continue to validate the former president's false claims of fraud by proposing harsh new voting measures. And even when other lawmakers in the party are successful in softening or stopping these, the outcome often remains new restrictions on voting -- however small or subtle -- that Democrats say are unnecessary and that are likely to disproportionately affect Black, Latino and poor voters.  But there is a difference between the public perception of these new laws and bills and the reality, Republicans say. Many of the most restrictive provisions have never made it past the bill-drafting phase or a legislative committee, halted by Republican leaders who say it is counterproductive to limit forms of voting that are convenient and that people in both parties prefer. (Republicans in states like Arizona have amassed such power in state legislatures in no small part because for many years their own voters embraced voting by mail.) And some Republicans have criticized as anti-democratic efforts to empower state legislators to reject the will of voters.  The latest Republican voting proposal to fall flat because of intraparty resistance was a ''wet signature'' requirement in Florida, which was set to be dropped from a bill that advanced out of a State Senate committee on Tuesday. The rule, which would have mandated a signature written by hand rather than a digital signature, was cut in part over concerns about its potential effect on older voters.  In Arizona, Mr. Kavanagh, a committee chairman in the state House of Representatives, noted that Republicans' bill to allow the Legislature to overturn certified presidential election results had never even been assigned to a committee.  Neither was the proposed measure to repeal the permanent early voting list, which is how more than three million voters in Arizona get their ballots.  Mr. Kavanagh said the list was ''tremendously popular with Democrats, Republicans and independents,'' and therefore made no sense to do away with.  Most proposals like these -- inspired by a misinformation campaign from Mr. Trump and allies like Rudolph W. Giuliani, who pressured Republican lawmakers to interfere with their state's certification process -- are dead, not just in Florida and Arizona but also in other states like Georgia, where Republicans set off a national uproar over voting rights. ''But that part never got written, or was rarely covered in the newspapers,'' Mr. Kavanagh said.  This year in Florida, lawmakers introduced legislation to ban drop boxes, limit who can collect ballots for other voters and restrict access to people in voting lines, among other provisions. The proposals were met with swift and forceful opposition from county elections supervisors, perhaps none whose opinion carried more weight than D. Alan Hays of Lake County. Mr. Hays, a conservative Republican who had previously served in the State Senate for 12 years, told his former colleagues at a legislative hearing last month that their bill was a ''travesty.''  ''In my role as supervisor of elections, I'm focusing on policy,'' he said in an interview. ''I don't pay any attention to party. If it's a good idea, we should give it every opportunity to succeed. And if it's a bad idea, we should do everything we can to stop it from being implemented.''  He and other supervisors worked phones and emails to explain to lawmakers the nuances of how elections are run and why some of their provisions would be impractical. This month, after the controversy over Georgia's new voting law, the Florida House softened its version of the voting bill; the proposal that ultimately passed out of the State Senate committee on Tuesday did not include some of the most stringent original provisions, like a ban on drop boxes (the availability of which it still limits).  ''To their credit, the legislators have shown great appreciation and respect for our opinions,'' Mr. Hays said.  Republicans who want to see changes to election law that would have far less of an impact on how votes are cast say that some of the proposals introduced by pro-Trump lawmakers are not helping. And these bills are muddying the waters, they say, in areas of the law like ballot security, where there used to be more bipartisan agreement.  Some Republicans say that in less polarized times, these measures wouldn't be attracting nearly as much controversy because even divisive issues like requiring a form of identification to vote had some bipartisan support.  A 2005 bipartisan commission led by former President Jimmy Carter and James A. Baker, the former secretary of state under Ronald Reagan, recommended requiring identification for all voters, but allowed for a flexible interpretation of what that could be, like a utility bill. That report also stated what independent elections experts say is still true: that absentee ballots remain the most susceptible to fraud, though fraud is exceptionally rare. In the very few instances that fraud has been caught and prosecuted, as in North Carolina in 2018, it often involves absentee ballots.  Most Republicans argue that measures are needed to safeguard and streamline absentee voting, especially because it was so prevalent last year during the pandemic -- and popular with voters.  In Georgia, Gabriel Sterling, a top Republican election official who bucked his party and Mr. Trump in December by denouncing claims of voter fraud as false and dangerous, said he didn't agree with everything in the state's new law. He took particular issue with the provisions that seem intended to punish his boss, Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, a fellow Republican who also pushed back against Mr. Trump's voter fraud lies, by stripping him of his voting power as a member of the State Election Board.  But Mr. Sterling said he believed that over all, ''It is a boring bill,'' adding: ''It is not the end of the world.''  He argued that ''there was going to be a cleanup bill'' to address voting given that record numbers of people voted early and by mail for the first time, creating considerable strain on local elections officials. And he pointed to local elections jurisdictions that were overextended with large numbers of signatures to match on absentee ballots.  On the one hand, he said, the government can hire staff members and pay them $10 an hour to compare signatures. On the other hand, he said that requiring an I.D. number like the last four digits of the voter's Social Security number or a driver's license number, as Georgia now does, seemed more efficient. ''You're saying, 'Does the number match?''' he said. '''Does it not match?' It's a very simple thing.''  He blamed Republicans for trying to placate Mr. Trump's supporters by introducing bills they knew would never pass -- and which, in some cases, lawmakers didn't fully believe were good policy. They just knew it was good base politics, he said.  ''Essentially the leadership of the House and the Senate said to their members, 'Introduce whatever you have to so your people are OK,''' Mr. Sterling said.  That was a mistake, Mr. Sterling added, but not necessarily surprising. ''There's a lot of voters who believe the lie, and we are a representative democracy.''  Patricia Mazzei contributed reporting.  Patricia Mazzei contributed reporting.  State Representative John Kavanagh, an Arizona Republican, said internal party pushback had stifled several proposed voting restrictions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY COURTNEY PEDROZA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00042 "
319		"    Mr. Putin's Tough Talk  By The Editorial Board  941 words 22 April 2021   24     Russian troops massed on the border of Ukraine, a dissident gravely ill, new sanctions. What's it all mean?  With his troops massing on Ukraine's borders, his sharpest critic on a hunger strike, his government under a new batch of sanctions levied by Washington and a major surprise expected from neighboring Belarus, Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, addressed his nation on Wednesday. Almost entirely, as it turned out, about domestic affairs.  That leaves the reasons for an alarming buildup of Russian military forces along Ukraine's southern border a mystery, probably a deliberate one. But whatever game Mr. Putin is playing -- and a lethal buildup like that could not happen without his say-so -- it's not a wise one. More than 13,000 lives have been lost in the seven-year Russia-Ukraine conflict, including 298 people aboard a Malaysian airliner downed by trigger-happy separatists.  Mr. Putin's address did touch, relatively briefly, on international affairs, but it was largely a familiar plaint about Russia being picked upon ''without any reason,'' along with chest-thumping about an ''asymmetric, fast and tough'' response should anybody think to cross a ''red line'' against Russia. That flourish raised eyebrows in the West, even though Mr. Putin never said where the red line was.  But there was no mention of the current situation around Ukraine -- nor of Aleksei Navalny, the dissident said to be in serious condition in a prison clinic; nor about what the Belarus president, Aleksandr Lukashenko, means by his talk of an impending ''very serious'' decision, which has prompted speculation about a formal union with Russia.  Mr. Putin has good domestic political reasons to address economic and social issues, including the struggle with Covid-19 in Russia, given his sagging ratings and parliamentary elections five months away. Ukraine is not a major concern among average Russians, who have been falsely assured that their troops are not involved, unless Russian soldiers start coming back in body bags. Polls show that Russians prefer economic development to dreams of a resurgent Great Russia, and at 68, Mr. Putin no longer holds the appeal he had when he came to power at 46, especially among younger Russians.  That is one reason analysts don't think Mr. Putin really intends any military action against Ukraine. Another reason is that the troop movements have been almost deliberately visible, but not suggestive of imminent action. It is in any case unlikely that Mr. Putin would try to overrun the rebel-held provinces of Ukraine, given the level of reaction this would provoke in the West.  The posturing then raises various other possibilities. One is that Mr. Putin is trying to put new pressure on President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, the former actor who was elected two years ago on the promise of cleaning up Ukraine's notoriously corrupt politics and making peace with Russia, but who has not made much progress on either front. This week, Mr. Zelensky declared that he was prepared to meet Mr. Putin at any time.  Mr. Putin may also be trying to forestall any American or European thoughts of throwing more weight behind Ukraine, and especially any notion of considering Ukraine for NATO membership. Or Mr. Putin is trying to demonstrate, at a time when U.S.-Russian relations are at a serious low, that he still must be reckoned with. Or all the above.  Whatever Mr. Putin's motive, the military buildup in Crimea is a dangerous ploy, especially by a major nuclear power. Chances that the saber-rattling could lead to an accidental confrontation may be minute, but even that is not a risk a responsible power should accept.  This month, President Biden sent Mr. Putin a clear signal. The new sanctions ordered against Russia, and the expulsion of 10 Russian diplomats, were the response Mr. Biden had promised against hacking, election interference and the targeting of dissidents abroad. The administration took the unusual step of detailing evidence of Russian responsibility for the SolarWinds hack of government and corporate computer systems, making clear that this was unacceptable.  With the stick, however, came a carrot, a proposal for a summit at which the United States and Russia could shift to a more productive partnership on issues of common concern -- including the opening of the Arctic to navigation, the Covid-19 pandemic, arms control, the rise of China and how to resolve the conflicts in Syria and Ukraine.  Mr. Putin arguably had no political choice but to throw out a clutch of American officials in retaliation. But it is now in his best interest to shift from tough guy to statesman. That would mean unwinding the military buildup, accepting Mr. Zelensky's offer of peace talks and meeting with Mr. Biden.  The bulk of Mr. Putin's address to his nation was a detailed program for dealing with the pandemic, climate change, infrastructure, income and all the other issues that are at the forefront of his people's concerns. Mr. Putin must surely understand that the leadership he sought to project would be far better served by a meeting with a new American president in pursuit of peaceful coexistence than it would by his bullying Ukraine or hounding Mr. Navalny.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (POOL  BY DMITRY ASTAKHOV)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004h "
320		"   THE SHIFT  After Lockdown, A YOLO Economy  By Kevin Roose  1,718 words 22 April 2021   1     Something strange is happening to the exhausted, type-A millennial workers of America. After a year spent hunched over their MacBooks, enduring back-to-back Zooms in between sourdough loaves and Peloton rides, they are flipping the carefully arranged chessboards of their lives and deciding to risk it all.  Some are abandoning cushy and stable jobs to start a new business, turn a side hustle into a full-time gig or finally work on that screenplay. Others are scoffing at their bosses' return-to-office mandates and threatening to quit unless they're allowed to work wherever and whenever they want.  They are emboldened by rising vaccination rates and a recovering job market. Their bank accounts, fattened by a year of stay-at-home savings and soaring asset prices, have increased their risk appetites. And while some of them are just changing jobs, others are stepping off the career treadmill altogether.  If this movement has a rallying cry, it's ''YOLO'' -- ''you only live once,'' an acronym popularized by the rapper Drake a decade ago and deployed by cheerful risk-takers ever since. The term is a meme among stock traders on Reddit, who use it when making irresponsible bets that sometimes pay off anyway. (This year's GameStop trade was the archetypal YOLO.) More broadly, it has come to characterize the attitude that has captured a certain type of bored office worker in recent months.  To be clear: The pandemic is not over, and millions of Americans are still grieving the loss of jobs and loved ones. Not everyone can afford to throw caution to the wind. But for a growing number of people with financial cushions and in-demand skills, the dread and anxiety of the past year are giving way to a new kind of professional fearlessness.  I started hearing these stories this year when several acquaintances announced that they were quitting prestigious and high-paying jobs to pursue risky passion projects. Since then, a trickle of LinkedIn updates has turned into a torrent. I tweeted about it, and dozens of stories poured into my inboxes, all variations on the same basic theme: The pandemic changed my priorities, and I realized I didn't have to live like this.  Brett Williams, 33, a lawyer in Orlando, Fla., had his YOLO epiphany during a Zoom mediation in February.  ''I realized I was sitting at my kitchen counter 10 hours a day feeling miserable,'' he said. ''I just thought: 'What do I have to lose? We could all die tomorrow.'''  So he quit, leaving behind a partner position and a big-firm salary to take a job at a small firm run by his next-door neighbor, and to spend more time with his wife and dog.  ''I'm still a lawyer,'' he said. ''But I haven't been this excited to go to work in a long time.''  Olivia Messer, a former reporter for The Daily Beast, also quit in February, after realizing that a year of covering the pandemic had left her exhausted and traumatized.  ''I was so drained and depleted that I didn't feel like I knew how to do my job anymore,'' she said. So Ms. Messer, 29, announced her departure and moved from Brooklyn to Sarasota, Fla., near her parents. Since then, she has been doing freelance writing as well as pursuing hobbies like painting and kayaking.  She acknowledged that not all people could uproot themselves so easily. But she said the change had been restorative. ''I have this renewed creative sense about what my life could look like, and how fulfilling it can be,'' she said.  If ''languishing'' is 2021's dominant emotion, YOLOing may be the year's defining work force trend. A recent Microsoft survey found that more than 40 percent of workers globally were considering leaving their jobs this year. Blind, an anonymous social network that is popular with tech workers, recently found that 49 percent of its users planned to get a new job this year.  ''We've all had a year to evaluate if the life we're living is the one we want to be living,'' said Christina Wallace, a senior lecturer at Harvard Business School. ''Especially for younger people who have been told to work hard, pay off your loans and someday you'll get to enjoy your life, a lot of them are questioning that equation. What if they want to be happy right now?''  Fearful of an exodus, employers are trying to boost morale and prevent burnout. LinkedIn recently gave the majority of its employees a paid week off, while Twitter employees have been given an extra day off per month to recharge under a program called #DayofRest. Credit Suisse gave its junior bankers $20,000 ''lifestyle allowances,'' while Houlihan Lokey, another Wall Street firm, gave many of its employees all-expenses-paid vacations.  Raises and time off may persuade some employees to stay put. But for others, stasis is the problem, and the only solution is radical change.  ''It feels like we've been so locked into careers for the past decade, and this is our opportunity to switch it up,'' said Nate Moseley, 29, a buyer at a major clothing retailer.  Mr. Moseley recently decided to leave his $130,000-a-year job before June 1 -- the date his company is requiring workers to return to the office.  He created an Excel spreadsheet called ''Late 20s Crisis,'' which he filled with potential options for his next move: Take a coding class, start mining Ethereum, join a 2022 political campaign, move to the Caribbean and open a tourism business. He looks at it regularly, he said, adding new pros and cons for each option.  ''The idea of going right back to the pre-Covid setup sounds so unappealing after this past year,'' he said. ''If not now, when will I ever do this?''  Disillusioned workers with money to spare have always gone soul-searching. And it's possible that some of these YOLOers will end up back in stable jobs if they spend through their savings, or their new ventures fizzle. But a daredevil spirit seems to be infecting even the kinds of risk-averse overachievers who typically cling to the career ladder.  In part, that's because more people than ever can afford to take a risk these days. Stimulus checks, enhanced unemployment benefits and a stock market boom have given many workers bigger safety nets. Many sectors now face severe labor shortages, meaning that workers in those fields can easily find new jobs if they need them. (Not all of these are high tech; many restaurants and trucking companies, for example, are struggling to fill open jobs.) U.S. job openings rose to a two-year high in February, and economists and business owners expect more turnover in the months ahead, as workers who stayed put during the pandemic start emerging from their bunkers.  ''Lots of things were on hold during the pandemic,'' said Jed Kolko, the chief economist at Indeed.com. ''To some extent, we're seeing a year's worth of big life changes starting to accelerate now.''  In addition to the job-hopping you'd expect during boom times, the pandemic has created many more remote jobs, and expanded the number of companies willing to hire outside of big, coastal cities. That has given workers in remote-friendly industries, such as tech and finance, more leverage to ask for what they want.  ''Employees have a totally unprecedented ability to negotiate in the next 18 to 48 months,'' said Johnathan Nightingale, an author and a co-founder of Raw Signal Group, a management training firm. ''If I, as an individual, am dissatisfied with the current state of my employment, I have so many more options than I used to have.''  Individual YOLO decisions can be chalked up to many factors: cabin fever, low interest rates, the emergence of new get-rich-quick schemes like NFTs and meme stocks. But many seem related to a deeper, generational disillusionment, and a feeling that the economy is changing in ways that reward the crazy and punish the cautious.  Several people in their late 20s and early 30s -- mostly those who went to good schools, work in high-prestige industries and would never be classified as ''essential workers'' -- told me that the pandemic had destroyed their faith in the traditional white-collar career path. They had watched their independent-minded peers getting rich by joining start-ups or gambling on cryptocurrencies. Meanwhile, their bosses were drowning them in mundane work, or trying to automate their jobs, and were generally failing to support them during one of the hardest years of their lives.  ''The past year has been telling for how companies really value their work forces,'' said Latesha Byrd, a career coach in Charlotte, N.C. ''It has become challenging to continue to work for companies who operate business as usual, without taking into account how our lives have changed overnight.''  Ms. Byrd, who primarily coaches women of color in fields like tech, finance and media, said that in addition to suffering from pandemic-related burnout, many minority employees felt disillusioned with their employers' shallow commitments to racial justice.  ''Diversity, equity and inclusion are extremely important now,'' she said. ''Employees want to know, 'Is this company going to support me?'''  Not every burned-out worker will quit, of course. For some, an extended vacation or a more flexible workweek might quell their wanderlust. And some workers might find that returning to an office helps restore balance in their lives.  But for many of those who can afford it, adventure is in the air.  One executive at a major tech company, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because she was not authorized to talk to the media, said she and her husband had both been discussing quitting their jobs in recent weeks. The pandemic, she said, had taught them that they'd been playing it too safe with their life choices, and missing out on valuable family time.  The executive then sent me a quote from the Buddha about impermanence, and the value of realizing that nothing lasts forever. Or, to put it in slightly earthier terms: YOLO.  Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0004f "
321		"    Nearly 24, a Former Wunderkind Makes a Big Comeback  By Karen Crouse  1,308 words 22 April 2021   9     Sean Foley, who coached Tiger Woods for four years, has helped Ko, a former world No. 1, connect her body with her mind. She's playing her best golf in years.  LOS ANGELES -- Lydia Ko of New Zealand was strolling the beach at Santa Monica on Sunday when she said she was bitten by a sea gull that swooped in and stole the sandwich in her hand. All Ko could do was laugh. Her return to the top 10 in the women's world golf rankings after more than three years of absence has much to do with her making peace with her ability to control only so much when she is in the sand.  Or on the fairway.  The day before, Ko, a former world No. 1, had ended a three-year title drought at the Lotte Championship in Hawaii, cruising to a seven-stroke victory fueled by her belief that the outcome was largely out of her hands.  For Ko, who at 17 became the youngest player, male or female, to reach No. 1 and had 14 L.P.G.A. wins before she turned 20, the expectations had become a burden that she could no longer comfortably shoulder. So she recently decided to release them to the winds of fate, telling herself ''the winner's already chosen.''  The mantra has freed her to play the best golf she's capable of instead of expending all her physical and psychic energies on manufacturing success. The results have made her 2021 feel like 2015. Going into this week's L.A. Open, the seventh-ranked Ko is 38 under par in her past five competitive rounds and has 16 subpar scores in 20 competitive rounds this year. She had one bogey and 39 birdies in her last 100 holes before Wednesday, when her hot hand went cold in a round where she shot a seven-over-par 78 at Wilshire Country Club. Ko was 14 shots off the pace set by Jessica Korda, who was in her group.  ''It takes a little pressure off to think that what's meant to be is going to happen,'' Ko said Tuesday. ''At the end of the day, you don't control your outcome even though you would like to.''  Ko, who turns 24 on Saturday, never went away, and yet her presence on the first page of leaderboards this year has the feel of a much beloved show returning after an interminable hiatus. After her Pro-Am on Tuesday, Ko was stopped by every player or caddie she passed as made the serpentine walk through a narrow tunnel and up a hill from the ninth hole to the practice putting green.  Everybody had congratulations and kind words for Ko, who has been one of the more popular players on the tour since she burst onto the golf scene like a blast of puppy's breath.  In 2012, as a 15-year-old amateur, Ko became the youngest winner of an L.P.G.A. event, topping a field at the Canadian Women's Open that included 48 of the top 50 of the year's leading money winners. She won the event again before turning pro at 16. The L.P.G.A. waived its 18-year-old minimum age restriction to grant her membership and Ko continued her rocket ascent. She won her first event as a professional, won Rookie of the Year honors, and won and won and won.  She was so consistent, she made the cut in her first 53 L.P.G.A. events. She was in such command of her game, she had won two majors and an Olympic silver medal before her 20th birthday.  But then the unimaginable happened: Ko stopped winning. Not only did the victories dry up, but Ko struggled to advance to the weekend. In the 12 months before the coronavirus pandemic shut down the tour, Ko missed four cuts, including one by seven strokes at the Evian Championship, one of the five women's golf majors. Ko's struggles called to mind something JoAnne Carner, a member of the World Golf Hall of Fame, said in 2012 after watching Ko equal her 1969 feat of winning an L.P.G.A. event as an amateur.  ''They tack a 'professional' after your name and all of the sudden you feel like you're supposed to know everything,'' Carner told The Times then. ''There's a lot more pressure and you try so hard and you put so much pressure on yourself.''  Ko's swing went south, but her smile never did, though at times both seemed equally mechanical. During her slump, Ko cycled through a series of swing coaches. One, David Leadbetter, who was fired at the end of 2016, was vocal in his belief that Ko's biggest impediment to success was her overreliance on her parents. He told anyone who asked that she needed to take control of her career if she wanted to turn around her results.  Last year, at the start of the pandemic, Ko made a pivotal phone call to Sean Foley, an instructor based in Orlando, Fla., where she lives, whose clients have included Tiger Woods.  ''I just felt like my swing was improving but I could do a little better,'' said Ko, who began working with Foley during the months when the tour was shut down but the courses in Orlando remained accessible.  Foley's interest in his clients extends beyond the swing plane, and his whole-person philosophy clicked with Ko. More than any adjustment he has made to her swing, Foley has helped Ko sync her mind and her body.  He reminded her that she can control only her effort, not the outcome. In the second event after the tour resumed last summer, Ko held a five-stroke lead with six holes to play. She took a one-stroke lead over a charging Danielle Kang into the final hole, a par-5, and made bogey to finish second. Just a bad day at the office, Foley told her. No big deal.  Entering the final round in Hawaii with a one-stroke lead over Nelly Korda, whom she had finished second behind at the Gainbridge LPGA in February, she retrieved one final text from Foley before she teed off. It read: Trust and conviction.  She wrote the words on her yardage book, then went out and played that way, closing with a 65 to clinch her first victory in 1,084 days.  ''I think that settled some of the doubts I had in myself,'' Ko said Tuesday, adding, ''I felt pretty calm playing. That's where I feel like it should be. Like just because I shoot a 68 or 78, that shouldn't dictate my mood and the way I am around the golf course.''  Ko considered the win as much a validation of her parents, and their approach, as of her and her game. ''For them to get criticism I thought was unfair because they're just doing everything they can to wish me to be happier,'' she said.  Foley's work with Ko is focused on finding that happiness, win or lose. For all her precocity -- perhaps because of it -- Ko had skipped over that lesson. She had to learn it the hard way.  Lydia Ko teeing off on the second hole at the L.A. Open on Wednesday, when she shot a seven-over-par 78. Ko, above right, with the caddie Fluff Cowan in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ASHLEY LANDIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS; DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times); Ko and Gaby López walking toward the final hole of the ANA Inspiration tournament on April 4. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RINGO H.W. CHIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00041 "
322		"    For Top Cop On Wall St., A Full Plate From Day 1  By Matthew Goldstein  1,439 words 22 April 2021   1     Gary Gensler, the new S.E.C. chairman, wants to improve corporate disclosure and regulate digital assets better. But a lot awaits him already.  Wall Street's new watchdog, Gary Gensler, is coming to the job with an ambitious agenda that includes taking a hard look at how to regulate digital currencies and requiring more environmental disclosures of companies. But the market may already be dictating some of the agenda for Mr. Gensler.  A former banker and regulator, Mr. Gensler, 63, was confirmed to lead the Securities and Exchange Commission last Wednesday, and took office on Saturday. One of the first things he will probably have to weigh in on as chairman is whether to assert more control over the red-hot market for special purpose acquisition companies, or SPACs, those speculative businesses that have raised well over $100 billion from investors.  He must also decide whether the S.E.C. should do more to protect small investors, who have recently become a major force in the stock markets, pushing up penny stocks and setting off the frenzied trading in shares of GameStop. Then there's Archegos Capital Management, the $10 billion fund whose implosion last month caused billions of dollars in losses for several Wall Street banks and spotlighted the loosely regulated world of family offices.  ''Gensler is going to be confronted with a range of enforcement issues, and he is going to have to determine what his priorities are,'' said Daniel Hawke, a former chief of the S.E.C.'s market abuse unit and now a partner with the law firm Arnold & Porter.  The S.E.C. has already opened inquiries into the GameStop and the Archegos situations and issued warnings to investors about the froth building around SPACs. Supporters of Mr. Gensler, a former Goldman Sachs banker and business school professor, expect him to move quickly on those issues, as well as the rest of his agenda. They said Mr. Gensler's experience running the Commodity Futures Trading Commission during the heat of the 2008 financial crisis makes him particularly well suited for this hectic moment on Wall Street.  ''One thing that Gary demonstrated very well at C.F.T.C. is he has ability to move a very broad agenda and very fast,'' said Dennis Kelleher, chief executive of Better Markets, a nonprofit, who served on President Biden's financial policy transition team, which Mr. Gensler led.  Mr. Kelleher said he expected Mr. Gensler to focus on reforming the rules around corporate disclosures -- including seeking more transparency from companies and big investors on their risks from climate change and contributions to it, as well as diversity on company boards -- because it affected much of his agenda.  ''Disclosure writ large will be a common thread through all the issues,'' Mr. Kelleher said. ''The S.E.C. is fundamentally a disclosure agency, and through better disclosure, you are supposed to be able to empower investors and enable enforcement.''  Gregory Gelzinis, who focuses on financial regulation at the Center for American Progress, a progressive think tank, said he expected Mr. Gensler to take a more comprehensive approach to dealing with cryptocurrencies and other digital assets.  Mr. Gelzinis said Mr. Gensler would probably draw on his familiarity with the subject matter -- he taught classes on blockchain technology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology -- to approach regulation around digital currencies more strategically. That would be a departure from his predecessor Jay Clayton, who favored enforcement actions against initial coin offerings without providing much regulatory guidance, he added.  Paul Grewal, chief counsel of Coinbase, the cryptocurrency exchange that went public last week, said the industry was ''hopeful'' about Mr. Gensler, noting that he is fluent in its language. Mr. Grewal said the industry wanted Mr. Gensler to provide clarity on how securities regulators decide when a digital asset is considered a security and subject to S.E.C. review, as opposed to a currency that is largely free from S.E.C. oversight.  The question grew in importance after the S.E.C. sued the San Francisco company Ripple Labs in December over the sale of its popular digital tokens to the public. The S.E.C. said the company was selling unregistered securities, while Ripple and others said the tokens should be classified as a digital currency. The enforcement action was one of the last brought before Mr. Clayton stepped down as chairman in the waning days of the Trump administration.  More recently, a brokerage affiliated with Sustainable Holdings, a financial technology company, asked the S.E.C. to weigh in on whether nonfungible tokens, which are being used to create digital art, are securities that require registration. The company, in its letter, asked the S.E.C. ''to engage in a meaningful discussion of how to regulate fintech companies and individuals that are creating NFTs that may be deemed digital asset securities.''  Mr. Gensler, while teaching at M.I.T., acknowledged that regulators had struggled with how to treat digital assets. In a 2018 interview, he said digital assets could at times appear to be both a commodity and a security. At his Senate confirmation hearing, Mr. Gensler spoke strongly for heightened requirements for companies to disclose climate risks and diversity efforts.  ''Diversity in boards and senior leadership benefits decision-making,'' he said.  Mr. Gensler declined to be interviewed.  One thing the past three months have shown is that the stock and bond markets have a way of quickly writing the agenda for anyone who leads the S.E.C. That means SPACs will almost certainly be scrutinized. In particular, Mr. Gensler will have to determine whether these blank-check companies are a good market innovation for taking fledgling companies public or an investment vehicle that has the potential to harm retail investors, Mr. Hawke of Arnold & Porter said.  Even before Mr. Gensler's arrival, others at the commission warned investors about the dangers of investing in a special purpose acquisition company simply because it is backed by a celebrity or well-known athlete. And in the past few weeks, acting division heads threw a chill into the $160 billion SPAC market with statements that suggested regulators were taking a close look at the disclosures in SPAC filings and some common accounting treatments.  Mr. Gensler, who is not a lawyer, earned a reputation as an aggressive regulator during his time at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, where he sought to better regulate derivatives -- the sophisticated financial instruments that some blamed for making the 2008 financial crisis worse because they allowed investors to add layers of leverage, or borrowed money, to their investments.  The blowup in late March at Archegos, a little-known investment firm, highlighted glaring weaknesses in the S.E.C.'s disclosure rules. The firm's enormous losses were attributed to highly leveraged equity derivatives that bolstered its overall market exposure to close to $100 billion. Neither Archegos nor the banks that arranged those trades had to disclose that exposure to regulators.  Market watchers have faulted the S.E.C. for having moved too slowly to institute disclosure rules that would require banks to inform regulators of the overall equity derivative risk they were taking on. Those disclosure rules, which have been under consideration for nearly a decade, are supposed to go into effect this fall.  Joyce Xu, head of the global derivative practice at Paul Hastings, a law firm, said the Archegos situation might give Mr. Gensler a chance to go beyond those limited reporting requirements and ask banks to provide more specific information about clients that appeared to be taking on too much risk.  ''The reporting rules are a bare minimum set of information, and that is where there is room for improvement,'' Ms. Xu said. ''This creates an opportunity for Mr. Gensler and the agency to come in and say, 'Here are tweaks we have to make to increase transparency even more.'''  Given all that awaits Mr. Gensler, Mr. Gelzinis of the Center for American Progress said that other than the financial crisis of 2008, the current period was one of the most consequential in decades for a new S.E.C. chairman.  ''To say he has a full plate may be an understatement,'' Mr. Gelzinis said.  Ephrat Livni contributed reporting.  Ephrat Livni contributed reporting.  Gary Gensler at M.I.T. in 2018. Mr. Gensler, the Securities and Exchange Commission's new chairman, will have many chances to put his stamp on the agency. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAYANA SZYMCZAK FOR THE new_york_times) (B6)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00040 "
323		"    I Lost Hope for Afghanistan  By Farahnaz Forotan  1,180 words 22 April 2021   25     As men continue to bicker over the future and control of Afghanistan, I have already lost my home and my country. I worked in Kabul as a television journalist for 12 years, and finally left in November after threats to my life.  I know how the Taliban plan to shape the future of my country, and their vision of my country has no space for me.  For what turned out to be one of my last assignments, I traveled from Kabul to Doha, Qatar, in October to report on the negotiations between the Afghan government and the Taliban. Like many Afghans, I was somewhat hopeful that the talks might help end the long, pitiless war in our country.  In Doha, I had the opportunity to interview members of the Taliban negotiating team at the conference hall where the talks were being held. The experience reinforced my sense that postwar Afghanistan, dominated by the Taliban, was bound to be a bleak place for Afghan women.  The incident that crystallized that dreadful feeling was my interview with Suhail Shaheen, the spokesman for the Taliban. I approached Mr. Shaheen for an interview in a room full of people. Like many young women in Kabul, I do not wear a head scarf. He couldn't hide his disdain at my presence and set about to ignore me. I didn't budge. I refused to be invisible and continued pointing my phone camera at him while asking my questions.  Afghan women live with a sense of being invisible. In our workplaces or in meetings like this one, our voices go unheard, our existence barely registered. Our presence in any public space is celebrated as gender equality in and outside Afghanistan, but all we experience in daily life is inequality and discrimination. It filled me with rage.  My encounter with Mr. Shaheen filled me with terror. When he finally answered one of my questions, his eyes moved in every direction but mine: He examined the walls, the carpet on the floor, the chairs, the door. He couldn't look at me, even while I stood in front of him. It was as if he saw me as an embodiment of sin and evil. I felt unsafe, even in a room full of people, thousands of miles away from Afghanistan.  The Taliban's notions of religion, politics and governance are based on a combination of a very orthodox interpretation of Islam, Shariah and tribal values. The ''Emirate'' they established in Afghanistan in the 1990s, which they are now seeking to establish again, barred women and girls from most jobs and forbade us to continue our education at schools and colleges, turning us into prisoners in our homes.  The Taliban see their Islamic government as duty bound to safeguard Muslim society from corruption and moral decadence, which they blame on the presence of women in public spaces, including universities and offices. They want to reduce us to bearing children.  The wars that men started and fought in Afghanistan have disproportionately devastated the lives of women. Yet the compositions of the peace delegations from Afghanistan reveal that women are barely considered as worthy of having a say. It is this knowledge and the memory of the Taliban rule in the 1990s that make me fear for the future of Afghan women.  My pessimism proved correct. On Nov. 9, a few weeks after I returned to Kabul from Doha, I received a call informing me that my name was on ''the hit list.'' Several journalists and rights activists were assassinated in October. Some more were killed in November.  About 200 female journalists in Afghanistan stopped going to work, and 50 journalists, including 15 female journalists, had to leave Afghanistan. According to Nai, a nonprofit group that supports Afghan journalists, of the 1,900 female journalists who were working in the country in January 2020, about 200 had left the profession by November. After I received the call about the threat to me, I made the extremely painful decision to leave my family and my country and seek safety elsewhere.  In November, gunmen attacked Kabul University and killed at least 21 students; it was not clear who was responsible. Fear and confusion took over Kabul. All we could be certain of is that the killings of journalists and civil society activists were deliberate and organized.  The Afghan authorities are not competent to investigate and prove culpability, the Taliban have denied they are responsible for these killings, and no one knows whether ''the hit list'' really exists or who created it. Yet the Taliban's enmity toward the media is no secret. In 2016, the Taliban threatened to kill Afghan journalists if they continued their ''unfair coverage'' of the group. They carried out their threat and killed seven journalists working for Tolo TV.  The Taliban have a long history of using assassinations to heighten the sense of insecurity among the people. The inability of the Afghan government and security forces to stop such attacks exposes their failures.  The Taliban have come close to achieving their goals through the use of force and military supremacy. After the United States concluded it couldn't win the war in Afghanistan, even after two decades of fighting the Taliban, it entered into negotiations with them last year. That decision offered the Taliban greater legitimacy than they had ever enjoyed.  The rights and status of Afghan women, their access to education and employment, and the creation of a relatively free media have become symbols of what is possible in Afghanistan. With the United States and its allies changing the goal posts, those freedoms are now imperiled.  I believe an important factor in changing American calculations regarding Afghanistan was the failure of governance and the widespread corruption in the Afghan government, its institutions and the broader Kabul elite. Afghans need to be introspective about our own failures. We need to talk about how to avoid yet more violence and to protect the rights and dignity of all Afghan citizens, men and women.  I am now in the United States. I am safe but longing for my home, wondering about the future of my country and my family. I can't shake off the despair and the sense that Afghanistan has been abandoned by the world. We might lose most of what we have gained in the past two decades if the Taliban return to power. The future looks bleak, but Afghanistan can't afford to stop trying to find a better way to move forward.  Farahnaz Forotan is an Afghan journalist. This essay was translated by Aziz Hakimi from the Dari.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  Farahnaz Forotan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Valerie Plesch FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003z "
324		"    Relief and Distress About Verdict as Police Face Doubts  By John Eligon and Shaila Dewan  1,320 words 22 April 2021   17     Unions and chiefs applauded the guilty verdict against Derek Chauvin, but rank-and-file officers were left feeling anxious.  MINNEAPOLIS -- It was shortly after 4 p.m. on Tuesday, and all chatter ceased in the roll-call room for the Fourth Police Precinct in North Minneapolis. Everyone's attention was glued to the television on the wall.  Then came the verdict: Derek Chauvin was guilty on all counts, including murder, for killing George Floyd last May. The station house stayed silent, the officers processing what the verdict meant after a year of tension and conflict, said Inspector Charles Adams, the precinct's commanding officer.  ''It was just like, wow,'' Inspector Adams said.  For him, it was a relief -- he felt that Mr. Chauvin had been wrong and that his actions, kneeling on Mr. Floyd's neck for more than nine minutes, cast a negative light on policing.  But the verdict did little to end months of upheaval and anxiety in his profession.  ''So much is being thrown at us as law enforcement officials,'' Inspector Adams said. ''We're unsure how we're going to police in the future.''  Police chiefs and unions across the country condemned Mr. Chauvin's actions and applauded the jury's verdict, but not always with the same zeal or for the same reasons. Some said they hoped it would restore faith in the criminal justice system. Others said it would help keep the peace. And still others indicated that it would clear the way for ''honest discussion'' about policing.  The feelings of rank-and-file officers were more complicated: a mix of relief, resentment at being vilified alongside Mr. Chauvin and unsettling thoughts of themselves in his shoes.  ''They're thinking, 'Man, I've got to think long and hard before I get out of my car and get into something I don't have to get into,''' said Jim Pasco, the executive director of the national Fraternal Order of Police.  In the Minneapolis station house, Inspector Adams heard of remarks from a few rank-and-file officers who believed the defense's argument that drugs killed Mr. Floyd and that Mr. Chauvin had followed his training.  ''Some just think he got a raw deal,'' Inspector Adams said. ''But there's a lot of them who think he was guilty, too.''  The full extent of the fallout for Mr. Chauvin will be known on June 16, when he is scheduled to be sentenced.  He is being held alone in a cell in a maximum-security prison in Oak Park Heights, Minn., a Twin Cities suburb. He is allowed out for exercise for only an hour each day. Even then, he is kept away from other inmates. Prison officials said Mr. Chauvin was being kept in solitary for his own safety.  Outside the Twin Cities, in rural communities where ''Back the Blue'' banners hang in storefronts, Mr. Chauvin's trial at times seemed a world away. There, largely white police departments patrol largely white communities, and residents are often friends or relatives of law enforcement officers.  In Gilbert, Minn., a community of about 2,000 three hours north of Minneapolis, Ty Techar, the police chief, said he watched only about an hour of the trial and 30 seconds of the body-camera footage. While he said that what Mr. Chauvin did would be unacceptable in his department, he stopped short of saying he agreed with the verdict.  ''For me to sit here and make a judgment on whether he got a fair trial, I don't know all the evidence,'' he said. ''I haven't looked at it closely enough.''  He added: ''Is it second-degree murder or manslaughter? I don't know much about the case.''  Police unions historically have been the staunchest defenders of officers, even those accused of wrongdoing. They did not defend Mr. Chauvin, but some used the verdict as an occasion to criticize public figures who have scrutinized the police.  The Police Officers Federation of Minneapolis said in a statement that it wanted ''to reach out to the community and still express our deep remorse for their pain'' and that ''there are no winners in this case.''  ''We need the political pandering to stop and the race-baiting of elected officials to stop,'' the statement said. ''In addition, we need to stop the divisive comments and we all need to do better to create a Minneapolis we all love.''  Police and union officials have argued that the consistent pressure some community members and elected leaders place on law enforcement can be a detriment.  In Minneapolis, there are several efforts to significantly downsize the Police Department and create a new public safety division. The governor of Minnesota has come out in support of a bill to limit police traffic stops for minor infractions. The Justice Department on Wednesday announced a broad civil rights investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department.  Inspector Adams said that several officers were now hesitant to perform even some of the most basic duties like traffic stops, worrying that such situations might escalate and get them in trouble.  In New York, a union leader seemed to play on such anxieties.  ''It is hard to imagine a tougher time to be a member of the law enforcement profession,'' Ed Mullins, the president of the Sergeants Benevolent Association, wrote in a letter after the verdict was announced. He warned members that their every action was being recorded and that ''scores of attorneys'' were eager to sue them.  ''Our elected officials are complicit in perpetuating the myth that we are the enemy,'' he added.  Attitudes like that, activists said, speak to the resistance of law enforcement to be held accountable and allow police abuses to continue.  Some police officials said the backlash to Mr. Chauvin's actions actually provided an opportunity to improve.  ''I think it takes us a step closer toward reform,'' said Michael S. Harrison, Baltimore's police commissioner. ''It doesn't make it harder to do our jobs. It makes it where we have to train better, and use best practices and we have to do our job the right way.''  The guilty verdict was a significant reminder for officers to stay within their training, said Rick Smith, the police chief in Kansas City, Mo.  ''I think officers understand that going outside the norms leads to potential issues,'' he said. ''And this one highlighted that in the hundredth degree across the nation.''  Inspector Adams said he believed that the judicial process ultimately helped the profession regain some of its credibility. Nine current and retired members of the Minneapolis Police Department testified against Mr. Chauvin at trial, including the police chief.  That testimony, Inspector Adams said, showed the public that Mr. Chauvin was not representative of the Minneapolis police. The prosecution's assertion during closing arguments that its case was against Mr. Chauvin, not the police, also helped, he said.  After Chief Medaria Arradondo testified that Mr. Chauvin acted outside of department policy, Inspector Adams said he texted him to say he was proud to belong to his staff.  Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and Eric Killelea contributed reporting from Minneapolis. Kim Barker and Ali Watkins also contributed reporting.  Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and Eric Killelea contributed reporting from Minneapolis. Kim Barker and Ali Watkins also contributed reporting.  After the verdicts Tuesday, Derek Chauvin was led away, top center. And demonstrators gathered in Minneapolis, above, and in New York City, top left. At top right, the police mobilized for a protest on April 12 after a Black man was shot in Brooklyn Center, Minn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STILL IMAGE, VIA COURT TV; VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times; HILARY SWIFT FOR THE new_york_times) (A16-A17); CHARLES ADAMS, Minneapolis police precinct commander (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA ELLEN REED FOR THE new_york_times) (A17)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003y "
325		"    Teachers Grapple With Chauvin Verdict  By Amelia Nierenberg and Dan Levin  436 words 22 April 2021   17     ''When it's plastered all over the news, they have questions,'' said Lacrissha Walton, a social studies teacher in Minneapolis.  Educators in Minneapolis and across the nation have grappled over the last few weeks with how to discuss the Derek Chauvin trial with their students, with some using jury selection or witness testimony as an opportunity to explore the complex issues of race, policing and the criminal justice system.  On Wednesday, their focus shifted to the verdict after a jury convicted Mr. Chauvin on three counts of murder and manslaughter for killing George Floyd.  Emily Beenen, a high school English teacher in Albuquerque, N.M., said she would have ''just a very simple debrief'' with her students and then ask some basic questions, such as: What do you think? How do you feel?  ''I am not trying to traumatize anybody, but you want to acknowledge their lived experience, but do so in an academic way and in a supportive way,'' said Ms. Beenen, who teaches mostly Native students. ''It kind of gives these names to these things that they already see and know around them.''  Teachers said it was difficult to avoid discussing a topic that dominates public consciousness, especially in a subject like social studies that usually includes a focus on current events. ''When it's plastered all over the news, they have questions,'' said Lacrissha Walton, a teacher in Minneapolis.  Many teachers said they opened their conversations with students by reviewing the basic facts of the case. Some framed ethical questions by discussing Darnella Frazier, a teenager who filmed the murder of Mr. Floyd and upended the police department's highly misleading initial description of his death. Others found ways to tie the current events to the curriculum.  ''We don't teach any of these things in a vacuum,'' said Ms. Beenen. ''The idea of critical thinking is that you are always critical thinking, making these connections to other texts, in your life, in the news, in politics.''  Jasmine Hobson Rodriguez, who teaches English in Hesperia, Calif., said she would use her class to help her high school students think through the moment.  ''I will make sure my kids have the space to talk about what they want to talk about, or not,'' she said. ''And then we're going to go back to reading 'The Great Gatsby.'''  Student activists from South High School in Minneapolis hung a banner in support of George Floyd in April. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Aaron Nesheim for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003r "
326		"    7 G.O.P. Lawmakers Pledge to Refuse Big Tech Money  By David McCabe  452 words 22 April 2021   4     The lawmakers said that the companies limited the reach of conservative voices.  A group of seven House Republicans said on Wednesday that they would no longer take donations from major tech companies or their top executives, a sign of the growing distance between some conservatives and big business.  The lawmakers said in a letter that the companies had limited the reach of conservative voices, citing bans on the chat app Parler after it was used by participants in the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, and had abused their market power.  ''These monopolies have shown that personal liberty can be threatened by corporate tyranny just as much as by government tyranny,'' they said in the letter. All but one of the lawmakers are members of the Judiciary Committee, which oversees the antitrust questions confronting the tech companies.  The pledge was led by Representative Ken Buck of Colorado, the top Republican on the Judiciary Committee's antitrust subcommittee. Mr. Buck said last month that he would not accept money from the tech giants' political action committees.  For years, lawmakers on the right have attacked Google, Twitter and Facebook, accusing the companies of unfairly removing content posted by conservatives. The lawmakers have also accused Amazon and Apple of stifling competition. In recent weeks, some conservatives have turned on other major businesses -- traditionally their allies in efforts to deregulate the economy -- that have opposed their positions on voting rights and other issues.  Five of the lawmakers received donations from the corporate political action committees of Google, Facebook and Amazon in the last election cycle. Representatives Chip Roy of Texas, Gregory Steube of Florida and Andy Biggs of Arizona received a combined $3,500 in donations. Representative Ralph Norman of South Carolina (not Oklahoma, as previously reported here) received $1,000 from Amazon's political committee.  But it is also possible that some of the lawmakers who signed the pledge will not have to turn any donations down in the near future. Amazon and Google froze donations to lawmakers who voted against certifying the election results after the Jan. 6 attack. Facebook paused all of its political donations.  Mr. Steube and Mr. Norman, as well as Representatives Dan Bishop of North Carolina and Burgess Owens of Utah, objected to the results of the presidential election.  Mr. Bishop and Mr. Owens both signed the pledge even though they did not receive money from the firms' political committees last election cycle.  The pledge was led by Representative Ken Buck of Colorado, the top Republican on the Judiciary Committee's antitrust subcommittee. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003t "
327		"    After 200 Million Shots, Now Comes Hard Part  By Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Annie Karni  1,893 words 22 April 2021   1     Half of American adults have received at least one shot of the coronavirus vaccine. Now comes the hard part: persuading the other half to get it.  WASHINGTON -- Now that President Biden has met his goal to have all adults eligible for the coronavirus vaccine, health officials around the country are hitting what appears to be a soft ceiling: More than half the nation's adults have received at least one dose, but it is going to take hard work -- and some creative changes in strategy -- to convince the rest.  State health officials, business leaders, policymakers and politicians are struggling to figure out how to tailor their messages, and their tactics, to persuade not only the vaccine hesitant but also the indifferent. Officials in many states are looking past mass vaccination sites and toward having patients get vaccinated by their own doctors, where people are most at ease -- a shift that will require the Biden administration to ship vaccine in much smaller quantities.  White House and state health officials are calling this next phase of the vaccination campaign ''the ground game,'' and are likening it to a get-out-the-vote effort. The work will be labor intensive -- much of it may fall on private employers -- but the risk is clear: If it takes too long to reach ''herd immunity,'' the point at which the spread of the virus slows, worrisome new variants could emerge that evade the vaccine.  ''If you think of this as a war,'' said Michael Carney, the senior vice president for emerging issues at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, ''we're about to enter the hand-to-hand combat phase of the war.''  On Wednesday, President Biden urged all employers in the United States to offer full pay to their workers for time off to be inoculated and to recover from any aftereffects. He also announced a paid leave tax credit to offset the cost for companies with fewer than 500 employees, and appealed to the unvaccinated to get their shots.  ''If we let up now and stop being vigilant,'' he warned, ''this virus will erase the progress we have already achieved.''  The president's plea came as he marked ''an incredible achievement by the nation'' -- 200 million shots in the arms of the American people, a target he said the nation would hit on Wednesday, with a week to go before his 100th day in office. By Thursday, Mr. Biden said, more than 80 percent of Americans older than 65 will have had their shots.  But the distribution is uneven: While New Hampshire has given at least one shot to 59 percent of its citizens (that figure includes children, most of whom are not yet eligible), Mississippi and Alabama are languishing at 30 percent.  The laggards are trying to adjust. In Louisiana, where 40 percent of the adult population has had one shot even though all adults have been eligible since March, officials are delivering doses to commercial fishermen near the docks and running pop-up clinics at a Buddhist temple, homeless shelters and truck stops. Civic groups are conducting door-to-door visits, akin to a get-out-the-vote effort, in neighborhoods with low vaccination rates.  In Alabama, Dr. Scott Harris, the state health officer, is trying to reach rural white residents, who are mistrustful of politicians and the news media. Dr. Harris is asking doctors to record cellphone videos, with a plea: ''Please email them to your patients, saying, 'This is why I think you ought to take the vaccine.'''  Some companies are contemplating their own vaccine clinics and educating their workers about the benefits of protecting themselves against a virus that has killed more than 568,000 people in the United States. Others are talking about giving their workers incentives, like cash gift cards -- a notion Mr. Biden raised on Wednesday in his remarks at the White House.  Shirley Bloomfield, the chief executive of N.T.C.A. -- The Rural Broadband Association, which represents small, rural telecommunications companies, has been working with the White House on pushing her members to get the vaccine.  ''One of my C.E.O.s is paying everyone $100 to get the vaccine,'' she said. ''I think we all have to be a little more creative because we're seeing that saturation point.''  Vaccine mandates could be an option, just as many employers led campaigns to ban indoor smoking. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has told employers that they can require vaccination to protect public health.  But with Republicans arguing that mandates amount to an intrusion on personal liberty, the White House is steering clear of the discussion, saying the decision to require vaccination or proof of it will be left to individual employers. And with the economy gearing up, managers are reluctant to demand inoculation, fearing too many employees would seek work elsewhere.  ''Employers feel that Covid has caused such stress on their people, they are reticent to put on any more pressure,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, the president of the Partnership for New York City, the city's leading business organization.  White House officials say they take it as a good sign that more than 51 percent of American adults have turned out for a first dose -- an indication that ''there are tens of millions of people who are still eager to get vaccinated,'' said Dr. Bechara Choucair, the White House vaccinations coordinator. But he is aware that Americans will soon no longer be fighting for vaccine slots, and supply will exceed demand.  In some parts of the country, that point may be here. In Mississippi, which opened vaccinations to all adults a month ago, 21 percent of the population is fully inoculated. In Alabama, the figure is 19 percent. In Georgia, home of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, only 20 percent of the population is fully vaccinated.  ''There are states where they feel they have hit the wall,'' said Michael Fraser, the executive director of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. ''The folks that wanted it have found it. The folks that don't want it are not bothering to find it.''  The fear is that even as some regions like New England race toward broad immunity, others will harbor coronavirus infections that could transform into more dangerous and more contagious variants, which could break through existing vaccinations.  While estimates of what it takes to reach herd immunity vary, most experts put the figure at 70 percent to 90 percent of the population. That figure includes children, who are not yet eligible to be vaccinated. And judging by the vaccination rates so far, herd immunity will be difficult to reach, particularly in the South.  Last week, Dr. Choucair said, the C.D.C. began working with states to identify primary care doctors in neighborhoods with a high ''social vulnerability index'' to get them vaccines.  ''It's really going to be all about the ground game,'' Dr. Choucair said. ''It's going to be about planning at the local level. It's going to be about microplans. It's going to be about county by county, ZIP code by ZIP code, census tract by census tract to make sure what are the strategies that work.''  Polls show that vaccine hesitancy is on the decline, as more people see their friends and relatives get vaccinated without incident. John Bridgeland, a founder and the chief executive of the Covid Collaborative, a bipartisan group of political and scientific leaders working on vaccine education, said the challenge was not being dogmatic in a public awareness campaign, but treating every person's concern as unique and valid.  ''People have very legitimate concerns,'' Mr. Bridgeland said, ''and they need good answers from trusted people.''  Complicating such reassurances is rising concern about safety after the government's decision to pause the single-dose Johnson & Johnson vaccine while regulators investigate reports of rare blood clots among six female recipients.  A C.D.C. advisory panel is expected to meet on Friday to determine whether to place restrictions on use of the vaccine, which public health officials had expected to use in hard-to-reach communities, like homeless shelters.  In the meantime, Mr. Fraser said his organization was exploring ways to move away from mass vaccination clinics, which assume ''everybody in the population is really chomping at the bit to get vaccinated,'' toward ''more retail public health,'' in which state and local health departments and providers reach out directly to the unvaccinated.  In some states, there have been surprises. In Alabama, Dr. Harris said, officials prepared extensively to address vaccine hesitancy among African-Americans and put ''a lot of time into trying to build local relationships with trusted voices'' -- an effort that he said paid off. But officials did not anticipate such strong resistance from rural white residents.  The state has done polling to figure out how to persuade that group, and learned that the best way to reach those residents would be through their own doctors. Yet having individual doctors administer the vaccine poses a logistical challenge for pharmaceutical companies and the Biden administration, which ships doses to states in large quantities.  One vaccine maker, Pfizer-BioNTech, ships 1,170 doses in a single pallet; the other, Moderna, ships packets of 10 vials containing 100 doses. State health officials are working with the Biden administration to receive smaller shipments, and are hoping for single-dose, prefilled syringes, which some experts say might not be possible because of supply chain constraints.  ''We need to get smaller volume of the vaccine so that you're not opening a vial and then having to throw it away after giving three or four doses,'' Dr. José R. Romero, the Arkansas health secretary and chairman of the C.D.C. advisory panel on vaccines, said on Wednesday. ''Either that or the federal government is going to have to accept the fact that we are going to be having a lot of wastage to get this done.''  In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Wednesday that as of Friday, people 60 and older could get vaccinated at 16 state-run mass vaccination sites without an appointment.  Private employers may be the next pressure point. The private sector is eager to jump in and help educate employees -- and even administer vaccines. But even with broad public awareness campaigns, television commercials and incentives like cash payments and personal time off, Ms. Bloomfield of the rural broadband association said vaccination rates among staffs at her member companies were topping out at about 50 percent to 60 percent.  On top of that, Ms. Bloomfield said her members reported that as many as 15 percent of people in small towns were not showing up for their second shot. She attributed some of that to social media posts about side effects. ''That doesn't help us,'' she said.  Above, a vaccination site in New Jersey on Monday. Left, stickers used in Alabama, which has struggled to persuade rural white residents to get their shots. Only 30 percent of Alabama's citizens have had at least one shot, one of the lowest figures in the nation. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE new_york_times; JAKE CRANDALL/THE MONTGOMERY ADVERTISER, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A8)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003o "
328		"    Chauvin Held in 23-Hour-a-Day Isolation  By Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and Tim Arango  503 words 22 April 2021   17     He has been placed in an isolated wing of Minnesota's only maximum-security prison because of fears for his safety.  Derek Chauvin is being held in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day in Minnesota's only maximum-security prison after he was convicted of murdering George Floyd and led out of a courtroom in handcuffs, according to authorities.  Mr. Chauvin, 45, the former Minneapolis police officer who knelt on Mr. Floyd's neck for more than nine minutes last May, was sent to the prison, in Oak Park Heights, Minn., a suburb of St. Paul, after the verdict was read on Tuesday. He has been placed in an isolated wing of the prison because of fears for his safety, said Sarah Fitzgerald, a spokeswoman for the state prison system.  Mr. Chauvin, who is being held as he waits to be sentenced, will be alone in his cell for all but one hour each day, during which he is allowed to exercise. Even then, he will be kept away from all other prisoners and remain under the watch of prison guards inside the unit.  The court on Wednesday set June 16 as the date for Mr. Chauvin's sentencing, according to a source familiar with the matter who was not authorized to speak publicly.  Though prison officials say Mr. Chauvin is being isolated for his own safety, prisoners are often sent to the wing, known as the Administrative Control Unit, as a punishment.  The cells are small and contain nothing more than a bench with a mattress pad, a combination toilet and sink, and a tiny shower. Prisoners are allowed to bring in necessities like clothing, toothpaste and soap, as well as a pen and paper. In some cases, they may also receive books, magazines or newspapers, but only if prison officials approve.  The cells are monitored by cameras, and guards are expected to look in on prisoners every 30 minutes to make sure they are there and healthy. A mental health expert must interview and write a report about any person who is held in the unit for more than 30 days, according to the state prison system's website.  There were 41 prisoners being held in the isolated unit on Wednesday, just over 10 percent of the total number of people incarcerated at the prison.  Mr. Chauvin had been free on bond since October, but Judge Peter A. Cahill ordered him to be taken into custody after the verdict. Mr. Chauvin faces more than a decade in prison for second-degree murder, the most severe charge. He arrived at the prison just before 5 p.m. on Tuesday, less than an hour after the jury's verdict was read.  A single cell of the Administrative Control Unit in Oak Park Heights, Minn., where Derek Chauvin is being held. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Minnesota Department of Corrections via, Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003p "
329		"    Biden Revisits a Trump-Era Tax Break  By Jim Tankersley  1,367 words 22 April 2021   1     The president promised on the campaign trail to overhaul opportunity zones, which a new study suggests mostly fueled real estate investment in gentrifying areas in 2019.  WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration is weighing how to overhaul a Trump-era tax incentive that was pitched as a way to drive investment to economically depressed swaths of the country but which early evidence suggests has primarily fueled real estate development in areas like Brooklyn neighborhoods that were already becoming richer and whiter.  Administration officials have not yet settled on how to make adjustments that critics and supporters alike say would improve the so-called opportunity zone program, a creation of President Donald J. Trump's 2017 tax law that Mr. Biden vowed on the campaign trail to reform.  The zones give tax breaks to certain investors who pour money into designated areas, which include high-poverty communities but also some neighborhoods that are rapidly gentrifying. Mr. Trump praised the zones repeatedly and claimed they were pulling large amounts of investment into impoverished neighborhoods, particularly Black ones.  ''They're the hottest thing you've seen,'' Mr. Trump said in North Carolina in February last year. ''Tremendous amounts of money being put into areas that hadn't seen money for decades and decades.''  The most comprehensive study of investment in the zones to date, released by a pair of University of California, Berkeley, researchers last week, contradicts Mr. Trump's assessment of the zones' early performance. The authors, Patrick Kennedy and Harrison Wheeler, are graduate economics students who were granted access to anonymous tax returns filed electronically. Mr. Kennedy is also an economic analyst at the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation.  The study suggests that in 2019, only about 16 percent of the 8,000 census tracts nationwide that were designated by state officials as opportunity zones using criteria set under the Trump administration received any investment at all. Rural areas received almost no investment. Most of the capital was concentrated in a small slice of zones.  Investors mostly flocked to real estate, construction and finance businesses in areas ''with pre-existing upward trends in population, income and home values'' that predated the creation of the zones, along with ''declining shares of elderly and nonwhite residents,'' the authors wrote.  The study does not address whether the investments created tangible economic benefits for residents of the zones, or track investments after 2019.  Supporters of the zones say the study includes signs of promise for the program, including that every state saw at least some investment in a zone, but is not a complete view of the program or its potential. They say regulations that the Trump administration completed at the end of 2019 will pave the way for larger and more diverse investments in the years to come.  Supporters and critics alike have pushed Mr. Biden's team to act unilaterally, and to urge Congress to pass new legislation, in order to improve the zones and try to drive a higher share of investment to projects that will benefit people and businesses in impoverished rural, urban and suburban swaths of the country.  A collection of business groups, investor organizations and others involved in the zones -- including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the Economic Innovation Group, the Washington think thank that first proposed the opportunity zone concept -- suggested detailed changes to the administration last month. That included changes the Treasury Department and Congress could make to improve the program's performance, including new reporting requirements for investments in the zones and additional flexibility to allow investors to put money into affordable housing projects.  ''The opportunity zones incentive is well on its way toward making its intended impact in struggling communities across the country,'' they wrote, ''but its effectiveness could be enhanced through a number of targeted improvements.''  John Lettieri, the president of the innovation group, said that the need for improvements to the program had been clear for years, and that the Berkeley study did not show it was failing.  ''We're grading an incomplete. It's far too early, and the data are too incomplete, to draw definitive conclusions about what is and is not working,'' Mr. Lettieri said. ''In the absence of all the things that create a stable market, to nevertheless see a stable market taking shape is promising.''  Opportunity zones convey tax advantages to investors who take the proceeds of a capital gain, like the sale of a stock or a business, and invest them through a fund into a qualifying project in a designated zone. They were a largely overlooked provision of Mr. Trump's tax law when Congress was debating it in 2017, but after the law's signing, the zones have stirred interest from investors on Wall Street, along with philanthropists and city leaders looking to revitalize distressed areas.  Critics of the program say the regulations issued by Mr. Trump's Treasury Department, which were meant to clarify what sort of investments would qualify for the special tax treatment, are unlikely to drive much investment into the sorts of projects that would help struggling people and communities, such as new businesses that would create jobs in areas with persistently high unemployment. Critics say evidence suggests the zones could be rewarding wealthy investors for projects that might well have happened even without the tax breaks. That includes a Mississippi sawmill that Mr. Trump spotlighted in 2019, which a new owner agreed to buy even before state officials decided to designate an area including the mill as an opportunity zone.  ''It's hard to see any evidence that low- and moderate-income people are benefiting from this incentive,'' said Brett Theodos, director of the Community Development Economic Hub at the Urban Institute in Washington. ''The Biden administration right now could institute reforms and make this program work a lot better for communities.''  While campaigning for president, Mr. Biden promised to improve the zones, seeing that as a way to bring about more economic equity. Among his promises was to require detailed new disclosure by investors in the zones in order to better track their effects on the distressed communities they are meant to help.  ''We cannot close the racial wealth gap if we allow billionaires to exploit opportunity zones tax breaks to pad their wealth,'' his campaign said as part of its Build Back Better agenda, ''rather than investing in projects that benefit distressed low-income communities and Americans that are struggling to make ends meet.''  The Treasury has already issued one regulation governing the zones, and more are on the way. Still, the program has not yet risen to the top of the president's tax agenda, administration officials say, given the other priorities that the White House is trying to push through Congress, including a $2.3 trillion infrastructure package.  Mr. Biden's economic team has not waded deeply into a bipartisan debate on Capitol Hill over how to apply new rules over what projects can qualify for the tax breaks associated with the zones, or whether to strip some wealthier communities of their opportunity zone status. But administration officials are aware of the new study and concerned about its conclusions. They are particularly interested -- as Mr. Biden promised in the campaign -- in efforts to increase transparency and affordable housing investment in the zones.  In many cases, the administration's plans line up with what critics and supporters are calling for. In others, the sides disagree. Mr. Theodos is pushing the administration to embrace a sort of government certification process for investment in the zones -- essentially requiring officials to sign off on projects that are worthy of the tax breaks. Mr. Lettieri said such a requirement would cripple the program.  A tax incentive appeared to fuel real estate development in Brooklyn. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEFANO UKMAR FOR THE new_york_times) (B1); Restaurants in Fort Greene, Brooklyn. The Biden administration is looking for ways to improve so-called opportunity zones, a program established by the Trump administration that helps high-poverty communities but also some areas like Brooklyn that are rapidly gentrifying. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE new_york_times) (B3)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003m "
330		"    Creating a Digital Playground In Theater's New Landscape  By Elisabeth Vincentelli  1,174 words 22 April 2021   3     The projection designer Jared Mezzocchi has become a go-to guy for ambitious virtual productions. Next up: Starring in his own haunted house play.  In March 2020, live venues closed, and the theater industry was shocked into numbness. But for the multimedia designer and director Jared Mezzocchi, the moment felt like a ringing alarm.  Mezzocchi warmed up in early May by co-directing a livestreamed student production of the Qui Nguyen play ''She Kills Monsters'' at the University of Maryland, where he is associate professor of dance and theater design and production. The show made imaginative use of filters in Zoom. Who knew that you could generate creature features in an app conceived for office meetings?  Numerous projects of diverse sizes and genres followed, playing to strengths Mezzocchi had developed as a projection designer, the person making new images or fashioning existing footage to be shown onstage. He is comfortable in the digital realm, can create a visual environment to tell a story, and has the technical know-how to handle virtual live performances -- he is a whiz with Isadora, a software that allows users to mix and edit Zoom on the spot.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Highlights have included Sarah Gancher's acclaimed ''Russian Troll Farm: A Workplace Comedy,'' which Mezzocchi directed with Elizabeth Williamson; video and web design for ''The Manic Monologues''; and multimedia design and direction on Mélisande Short-Colomb's recent ''Here I Am.''  Next, Mezzocchi is starring in his own interactive virtual play, ''Someone Else's House,'' which starts previews Friday at the Geffen Playhouse in Los Angeles.  To be sure, Mezzocchi, 35, didn't wait for March 2020 to get busy. In 2017, for example, he won Obie and Lucille Lortel Awards for his projection design on the Manhattan Theater Club production of Nguyen's ''Vietgone.''  But his workload and influence have exploded over the past 13 months. Last September, he further extended his reach by creating the Virtual Design Collective (ViDCo), a think tank, networking hub and problem-solving resource (watch it in action during the live event ''Word. Sound. Power. 2021'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday).  ''He's unafraid to ask bigger questions and push what's really possible theatrically,'' May Adrales, the ''Vietgone'' director, said over video.  ''Someone Else's House,'' produced in association with ViDCo, is yet another experiment for Mezzocchi, who is stepping in front of the camera to recount a haunting story that happened to his family in their home state of New Hampshire.  ''I've never seen myself as a tech person,'' he said in an email. ''Hell, I was an actor my whole childhood and through grad school. Multimedia became an extension of myself as a storyteller -- not the other way around. So this is a really thrilling moment of convergence for me.''  Based in Silver Spring, Md., Mezzocchi maintains strong ties to New Hampshire: Since 2015, he has been the producing artistic director at Andy's Summer Playhouse in Wilton, which he attended as a kid and where he now implements many of his ideas about the interconnection of community, art and technology.  He discussed them and more in a pair of conversations conducted on -- what else? -- Zoom.  Do you think the disappearance of live theater has changed the way we approach storytelling?  Without getting into better or worse, I think this period has allowed for more strategies to emerge. Think of TikTok or Snapchat: We hear words with visuals in a way that we weren't 10 years ago -- we're now telling full stories with a series of memes online. The most successful works I've seen this year had technology as a scene partner, not as lipstick and blush. I hope that remains when we get back to in-person.  Ideally, what should happen when in-person performances return?  First, everyone's like, ''I can't wait for theater to be back.'' I don't want to nitpick, but I would love us to say: ''I can't wait for in-person theater to allow us to create story inside of a venue again.'' People are making performance right now, and we need to embrace that. A lot of theaters are not going to stop the digital marketplace because they've seen great value in the accessibility to it. I'm excited for where that takes us when digital performance is a choice rather than survival.  You were a video projectionist at the Manhattan nightclub Santos Party House for a few years starting in 2008. How did that influence your theater work?  I would spend hours making the perfect thing, and no one would care, and then I would put up a cat video and everyone would cheer! Learning pop culture, learning how to engage with an audience, how to listen to a D.J., how to engage with a band -- it became much more musical to me. Sarah Gancher comes from a musical background, and on ''Russian Troll Farm'' we found ourselves talking about cadence, tempo, percussiveness. It's not about, ''This is what it's going to look like,'' but, ''Here's the energy we're trying to generate.''  In an essay for Howlround Theater Commons , you wrote that ''theater must stop making films during the pandemic.'' Ouch! Do you think being live defines theater?  Absolutely, and that's unchangeable for me. You make different decisions when you have to make them in the moment, and I think it has to do with audience engagement. If an audience feels like it's important that they're there and listening, they're going to listen differently. And if the performer knows there's an audience listening in a particular way, it's going to be different. Is it perfect? Totally not [laughs]. Digital technology's value system, for whatever reason, is married to spectacle and a different kind of quality. I've noticed a lot of people running from liveness so they can get a higher spectacle at a higher quality. I'd rather be rough and dirty and maintain liveness.  You often talk about community-building, which has included instituting talkbacks at Andy's Summer Playhouse. Why is that important to you?  It's important to leverage localism so that we can really understand communities. Right now the only way into a community is often a national tragedy, and that's too late. How can art help? Well, there's no tragedy involved when you're creating something. I love Andy's because it reminds people that debate is important, and that kids can and should lead a lot of conversations in local environments. They are the reminder that change is beautiful and necessary.  Right, Jared Mezzocchi. Below, a still from the play ''Someone Else's House.'' Bottom, Haskell King in ''Russian Troll Farm: A Workplace Comedy,'' which Mezzocchi co-directed. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GREG KAHN FOR THE new_york_times; GEFFEN PLAYHOUSE; THEATERWORKS HARTFORD)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00046 "
331		"    U.S. to Scrutinize How Minneapolis Handles Policing  By Katie Benner  1,594 words 22 April 2021   1     The investigation was a sign that President Biden intends to wield federal law enforcement as a tool to combat police abuses.  WASHINGTON -- Attorney General Merrick B. Garland announced on Wednesday a sweeping investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department, signaling that the Biden administration will seek to combat police abuses around the country and apply stricter federal oversight to local forces.  The Justice Department will examine whether the Minneapolis police routinely use excessive force or treat minorities unfairly. The inquiry will also scrutinize police training and accountability practices, among other issues. Mr. Garland's announcement came a day after the conviction of former Officer Derek Chauvin in the murder last year of George Floyd, a Black man whose death spurred the largest racial justice protests in decades.  ''Good officers do not want to work in systems that allow bad practices,'' Mr. Garland said in brief remarks delivered at the Justice Department. ''Officers welcome accountability because accountability is an essential part of building trust with the community and public safety requires public trust.''  The Minneapolis police have long faced accusations of racism. Black residents are more likely to be pulled over, arrested or roughed up than white residents. Black people, who account for 20 percent of the city's population, made up more than 60 percent of the victims in city police shootings from late 2009 through May 2019, police data shows.  The police force pledged to cooperate with the federal inquiry. ''I look forward to sharing the great work done by our teams, day in and day out, with the Department of Justice and getting their feedback on how we can serve our communities even better,'' Chief Medaria Arradondo said in a statement, adding that he had sought federal help in overhauling the department for three years. Chief Arradondo testified against Mr. Chauvin this month.  President Biden had vowed as a candidate to fight excessive force by the police, and he called on lawmakers on Tuesday to resurrect the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, a measure by Democrats aimed at curbing police misconduct and racial discrimination. Lawmakers in both parties said on Wednesday that they hoped Mr. Chauvin's conviction could help revive the bill, which seeks to curtail qualified immunity for officers, ease the way for prosecutions and mandate more changes for departments.  Mr. Chauvin is being held in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day in the state's only maximum-security prison, according to the authorities. Though officials at the prison in a suburb of St. Paul say Mr. Chauvin is being isolated for his own safety, prisoners are often sent to the wing as a punishment.  The Justice Department inquiry is a return to robust federal oversight of local policing that had been a hallmark of the Obama era. During the Trump administration, the Justice Department largely stopped opening civil investigations into broad police misconduct, known as pattern-or-practice investigations.  Such inquiries sometimes end in consent decrees, court-approved deals between the department and local governments that create and enforce a road map for training and operational changes. Former Attorney General Jeff Sessions had curbed the use of consent decrees, calling them unfair to police departments.  Former Attorney General William P. Barr opposed opening an investigation into the Minneapolis police last summer, officials said at the time, saying that officers were struggling to keep control of a city hammered by protests.  Mr. Barr instead offered financial help and training for the department to address its issues -- incentives that the Obama administration also used to improve police forces -- but the Minneapolis City Council declined the offer, according to a city official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe officials' deliberations.  Mr. Garland restored the Justice Department's use of consent decrees last week and called pattern-or-practice investigations ''an important tool of the Justice Department to ensure police accountability'' in a recent interview with ABC News.  He has also characterized civil rights issues, including addressing police misconduct, as one of his top priorities. He has said that he sees Vanita Gupta, a well-known civil rights lawyer who was confirmed on Wednesday to serve as the Justice Department's No. 3 official, as crucial to that mission, along with Kristen Clarke, Mr. Biden's choice to run the department's Civil Rights Division.  ''They have skills that I do not have,'' Mr. Garland told civil rights leaders last week. ''They have experiences that I do not have.''  But overhauling police departments has always been a balancing act for the department, which relies heavily on state and local police forces to help fight crime. Mr. Garland and his top deputies were confirmed with broad support from police groups, and they have all said they do not support progressive proposals like defunding the police.  Civil rights activists have pressed federal law enforcement officials to do more to curb abuses, but Mr. Biden dismayed activists by reversing course on a promised police oversight commission.  That leaves the Justice Department as one of his most powerful weapons to fight police excesses. Because convictions in high-profile police killings are rare, the department has considered pattern-or-practice investigations a vital tool for overhauling police practices.  In the case of Tamir Rice, a 12-year-old Black boy shot to death in 2014 by a Cleveland police officer, Justice Department officials opted not to seek an indictment of the officer, but did obtain a consent decree to overhaul the Cleveland Police Department.  Tamir's family has asked Mr. Garland to reopen the inquiry into his death in light of a new_york_times report that Trump-era officials stopped prosecutors from pursuing a false statements case against the officer.  Federal prosecutors also face a high bar in pursuing charges of civil rights violations against the police. Years after a Staten Island grand jury declined to charge Officer Daniel Pantaleo in the death of Eric Garner, whom officers were trying to arrest on suspicion of selling untaxed cigarettes, the Justice Department said it would not file civil rights charges against the officer. Officials said prosecutors were unlikely to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he willfully violated Mr. Garner's civil rights.  Like Mr. Floyd, Mr. Garner gasped, ''I can't breathe'' as Officer Pantaleo wrapped his arm around his neck and squeezed. Mr. Garner's death, also captured on video, prompted nationwide protests and helped to catalyze the Black Lives Matter movement.  The Justice Department is enforcing 16 settlements with law enforcement agencies, including 12 consent decrees. Since January 2017, it has concluded the implementation of consent decrees in East Haven, Conn.; in Warren, Ohio; and with the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office in Arizona.  It also has four open investigations into law enforcement agencies, including two in Orange County, Calif.; another in Springfield, Mass.; and now in Minneapolis.  The department told officials there on Wednesday morning before Mr. Garland's announcement that it would be investigating the police.  Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota noted in a statement that the state's Department of Human Rights had opened its own civil rights investigation and obtained ''a groundbreaking temporary restraining order'' against the department. Now, ''under the leadership of President Biden and Attorney General Garland, the United States Department of Justice is also answering the call,'' Mr. Walz said.  Mr. Garland said the federal investigation into the Minneapolis Police Department was separate from the existing Justice Department criminal investigation into whether Mr. Chauvin violated Mr. Floyd's civil rights.  The broader inquiry will be led by career lawyers and staff in the department's Civil Rights Division and the U.S. attorney's office in Minnesota. They have already contacted community groups and residents and will question police officers as well, Mr. Garland said.  In addition to examining whether the department routinely uses excessive force -- including during protests -- investigators will look into whether officers' treatment of people with behavioral health disabilities is unlawful. They will also review the department's policies, including whether they are effective at ensuring that police officers act lawfully.  Mr. Floyd's death underscored longstanding allegations of racism against the Minneapolis police force that have been so serious and sustained that Chief Arradondo sued his own department earlier in his career. Black residents have often filed excessive force complaints against Minneapolis officers, including Mr. Chauvin, who pinned Mr. Floyd to the ground for more than nine minutes.  Officers already felt pressure because of the scrutiny from community members and elected leaders over the years, said Inspector Charles Adams of the Minneapolis Police Department. While a Justice Department investigation could be beneficial, he said, he also expressed concern that officers could be more reluctant to police proactively out of fear that an interaction could go wrong.  ''Now that's going to heighten it even more,'' he said.  If federal investigators find that the department has engaged in unlawful policing, Mr. Garland said, the Justice Department would issue a public report. It can also sue the department and enter into a settlement agreement or consent decree to help ensure that the department is overhauled.  The challenges in addressing systemic racial inequities ''are deeply woven into our history,'' Mr. Garland said, adding that it would take time and effort to build ''trust between community and law enforcement.''  Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and John Eligon contributed reporting from Minneapolis.  Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and John Eligon contributed reporting from Minneapolis.  Attorney General Merrick B. Garland on Wednesday. (POOL  BY ANDREW HARNIK)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003j "
332		"    Take a Springtime Politics Quiz  By Gail Collins  844 words 22 April 2021   24     Trump's gone. Let's make sure you're still paying attention.  Spring is here, folks! I know things aren't really normal yet. But they seem to be coming around. Picnics! Movies! Sooner or later we'll all actually be going to work at ... work. And before your socializing gets into full swing, let's make sure you're caught up on everything that's been going on in the wonderful world of politics.  1. Donald Trump celebrated his post-presidential Easter by ...  A) Hiding some eggs where Eric and Don Jr. couldn't find them.  B) Claiming the election was rigged.  C) Donning bunny ears and passing out treats along our southern border.  2. Senator Steve Daines, Republican of Montana, took a trip to view the immigrant problems on the Mexican border and bemoaned the flood of drugs coming into the country. Daines said that back in his home state, methamphetamine, or ''meth,'' used to be ...  A) Sometimes confused with ''math.''  B) Nonexistent.  C) Homemade.  3. Representative Matt Gaetz of Florida is in trouble for his extremely bouncy sex life. Colleagues in the House reportedly claimed Gaetz used to ...  A) Try to sign them up for the Billie Eilish fan club.  B) Wander around the House floor showing off nude photos of women he said he'd slept with.  C) Sell them cookies on behalf of a niece in the Girl Scouts.  4. Lately, the tireless Mike Lindell of MyPillow fame has ...  A) Launched a new social media platform, presumably to remind people that he thinks Trump was re-elected.  B) Introduced a series of stuffed models of right-wing militia leaders known as Fluffy Friends.  C) Announced he'll be competing in professional wrestling matches as the guy who beats liberal enemies over the head with a throw pillow.  5. Marwa Elselehdar, Egypt's first female ship's captain, complained about being barraged by rumors that ...  A) She'd been cast as the villain in the next James Bond movie.  B) She was the captain of the megaship that blocked the Suez Canal.  C) She was dating Matt Gaetz.  6. Andrew Giuliani, Rudy's son, is reportedly thinking about announcing that he's ...  A) Running for governor.  B) Joining the Trump-in-exile forces as a full-time caddy.  C) Hiring a new father.  7. Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, questioned whether Joe Biden was ''really in charge'' and pointed to his ...  A) Failure to keep Congress updated on budget plans.  B) Inconsistent foreign policy.  C) Low level of tweeting.  8. The Air Force is developing a new presidential jet, with décor inspired by ...  A) The peregrine falcon.  B) The bald eagle.  C) The German shepherd.  9. Joe Biden's middle name is ...  A) Gamaliel.  B) Robinette.  C) Hank.  10. In a speech to Republican donors at Mar-a-Lago, Trump referred to Mitch McConnell as ...  A) ''That guy with no chin.''  B) A ''dumb son of a bitch.''  C) ''The Louisville loser.''  11. Gov. Ron DeSantis has been trying to prohibit cruise lines in Florida from ...  A) Requiring their passengers be vaccinated.  B) Constantly playing ''Banana Boat Song.''  C) Serving dolphinburgers.  12. We all remember that way back at the beginning of the pandemic in 2020, DeSantis declared that ...  A) Professional wrestling was an ''essential service.''  B) ''Nobody ever got sick from eating at a beach restaurant.''  C) Miami was the ''Covid Fun Capital.''  13. When Texas was hit with a terrible storm, floods and power outages, Senator Ted Cruz responded by quickly ...  A) Reporting for duty as a volunteer at a hostel for the newly homeless.  B) Recording a song called ''Democrats Dumped the Water.''  C) Flying to Cancún, Mexico.  14. When former House Speaker John Boehner published a memoir that was extremely critical of Cruz, the senator ...  A) Told supporters that the First Amendment covered ''dolts, too.''  B) Suggested donors might get to vote on whether to machine gun, chainsaw or just burn the book.  C) Refused to comment, claiming he was still too busy helping with the storm cleanup.  ANSWERS: 1-B, 2-C, 3-B, 4-A, 5-B, 6-A, 7-C, 8-A, 9-B, 10-B, 11-A, 12-A, 13-C, 14-B  How did you rate?  12-14: It's possible you're dwelling on this too much.  8-11: Tell your friends you got a B-plus in citizenship.  4-7: Hey, recess is over.  0-3: Be careful or people are going to suspect you care about politics only when there's a crazy person on top.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Paul J. Richards/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003g "
333		"    Pullout From Afghanistan Gives Guantánamo Detainees Hope for Release  By Charlie Savage and Carol Rosenberg  1,445 words 22 April 2021   11     The legal basis for indefinite detention at Guantánamo is to prevent combatants from returning to the battlefield. But what if their old battlefield is no more?  WASHINGTON -- President Biden has declared that he intends to end the war in Afghanistan by the 20th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks this year. But it is less clear whether anything will change for detainees at the prison at Guantánamo Bay that was opened for that war.  Traditionally, when conflicts end, wartime detainees are sent home. But the government, under the administrations of both parties, has taken the position that the war Congress authorized after Sept. 11 is bigger than the conflict in Afghanistan. Moreover, Mr. Biden is not declaring defunct the broader war against Al Qaeda and its progeny, wherever they are.  Still, lawyers for at least two of the 40 remaining prisoners at Guantánamo told federal judges this week that whatever wartime legal authority the government had to detain their clients was evaporating. The motions were the first legal fallout from Mr. Biden's announcement.  One of the detainees, Khalid Qassim, 44, is a Yemeni man who has been held without trial at Guantánamo for nearly 19 years; he was captured in late 2001 or early 2002 and is being held as a Qaeda trainee who ''may have fought for the Taliban in or near Kabul and Bagram, Afghanistan, before fleeing to the Tora Bora mountains in late 2001.''  On Monday, his lawyers sought a judge's permission to expand his existing habeas corpus lawsuit to include the new argument that with Mr. Biden's ''announced end to the involvement of United States troops in active combat in Afghanistan, there can no longer be any legal basis'' to keep detaining him.  The other, an Afghan named Asadullah Haroon Gul, who is about 40, was captured in 2007 by Afghan forces and turned over to the United States military. A basis for holding him is his past affiliation with a militia known by the acronym HIG, a movement that -- like its sometime allies the Taliban and Al Qaeda -- resisted the American and allied invasion of Afghanistan.  The militia, however, made peace with the Afghan government in 2017, essentially breaking with the Taliban. Even before Mr. Biden's decision to withdraw from Afghanistan, lawyers for Mr. Haroon had already sued seeking his release because the militia was no longer engaged in an armed conflict in Afghanistan.  In a motion filed in his habeas case on Tuesday, his lawyers also argued that while they believed Mr. Haroon should have been released years ago anyway, now the United States had even less of a basis for holding him and he should be ''immediately'' sent home.  ''The law is clear: Asadullah gets to go home now, regardless of whether, as the government incorrectly contends, he was part of or substantially supported Al Qaeda,'' they wrote.  The Justice Department has not yet responded to the filings.  John F. Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman, said in an interview that Mr. Biden intended to close the wartime prison, but argued that there was no direct link between its future and the coming end to what he called the ''mission'' in Afghanistan.  ''We are still going to maintain counterterrorism capabilities in the region,'' he said. ''And we will still be able to strike at terrorist threats in Afghanistan even if we don't have boots on the ground.''  After the Pentagon opened the wartime prison in January 2002 and detained hundreds of men there, more were from Afghanistan than from any other nation. Today, 40 detainees remain, more than half of whom were captured outside Afghanistan and only two of whom are Afghans.  The Biden administration's intention to pull American troops out of Afghanistan (save for an embassy guard force) is a new chapter in a saga over how the war that grew out of the Sept. 11 attacks has challenged the traditional moral basis for law-of-war detention.  Indefinite wartime detention -- without trial and until the end of hostilities -- developed as a humanitarian alternative to killing captives to prevent them returning to the battlefield and posing a later danger. But traditional wars end after a few months or years. The open-ended nature of the post-Sept. 11 ''forever war'' transformed the practice into a recipe for possible life imprisonment without trial.  The Bush administration first claimed a legal right to hold detainees captured in Afghanistan indefinitely and without trial at Guantánamo in 2002, and the Supreme Court approved that authority in 2004, so long as detainees received a fair hearing.  In the ruling, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor suggested that the legal basis for holding Guantánamo detainees might ''unravel'' over time if the war never ended. But, she wrote, the court did not need to worry about perpetual detention at that point since the United States was still ''involved in active combat in Afghanistan.''  That, however, left unanswered the question of what it would mean if Afghanistan was no longer an active zone of armed conflict, even as fighting raged elsewhere thousands of miles away.  Mr. Haroon's case may be stronger since he is an Afghan citizen, as opposed to other detainees who the government says traveled to Afghanistan to join Osama bin Laden's Islamist movement. There is only one other Afghan still at Guantánamo, Muhammad Rahim, 55, but he presents a more complex case.  He was initially held in C.I.A. custody as a ''high-value detainee,'' and his 2016 intelligence profile describes him as a courier and facilitator for Al Qaeda -- including for Bin Laden -- who had advance knowledge of the Sept. 11 attacks. He has never been charged with war crimes.  If the evidence is strong that Mr. Rahim worked directly for Al Qaeda, the government can argue that wartime authority continues to exist to hold him to prevent him from returning to the fight, even if the warfare involving the United States in Afghanistan is over. But his lawyer, Cathi Shusky, a federal defender in Ohio, argued that the evidence was weak.  ''There's a reasonable explanation he wasn't part of either'' Al Qaeda or the Taliban, said Ms. Shusky, who said many of the details of his case were classified, preventing her from elaborating. ''There is some twisting of the narrative. I think when the facts are fully revealed, it will show his continued detention is not lawful.''  A U.S. military representative for Mr. Rahim, told an administrative review board in March 2016 that Mr. Rahim regretted his past and wanted to return to his two wives and seven children in Afghanistan. His motivations were not ideological, the representative said; rather ''he only did what he did for money, so he could feed his family.''  His federal court petition for release has been on hold for years while he sought release through the board, which has repeatedly declared his detention a national security necessity. But Ms. Shusky said she and another lawyer were planning to revive his habeas corpus case in light of the decision to pull out of Afghanistan.  A ruling in an earlier case is reason for caution. In President Barack Obama's second term, he declared an end to the ''combat mission'' in Afghanistan and more broadly described the war as ''over.'' Citing that language, a Yemeni detainee at Guantánamo, who was held as a Taliban militia member, asked a judge to order his release since the American commander in chief had said the war had ended.  But the reality on the ground was that the American military continued to battle militias deemed to pose a threat, including the Taliban and those who swore allegiance to the new Islamic State. In July 2015, Judge Royce C. Lamberth ruled that the government still had authority to detain the man because fighting continued in Afghanistan.  ''A court cannot look to political speeches alone to determine factual and legal realities merely because doing so would be easier than looking at all of the relevant evidence,'' Judge Lamberth wrote. ''The government may not always say what it means or mean what it says.''  In the end, the Obama administration sent the detainee to Oman for resettlement. But, as of their most recent reviews by the six-agency, parolelike board, both Afghan men who remain there are still designated as ineligible for trial and deemed too dangerous to release.  A Guantánamo Bay detainee in April 2019. Some lawyers say the legal basis for detaining prisoners there is evaporating. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003k "
334		"   CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  On TV, Spend Earth Day With David, Greta ... or Cher?  By Mike Hale  1,423 words 22 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     This year's specials include a Greta Thunberg documentary, a David Attenborough extravaganza, James Cameron on whales and Cher rescuing an elephant.  Earth Day may exist to help protect the nonhuman environment from our determined efforts to destroy it. But if you want to get an Earth Day television documentary made, it helps to have the name of a well-known human, or two, attached.  The 52nd edition of the annual event on Thursday brings with it a full roster of new shows to stoke our guilt and maybe drive us to action, and viewers can choose which celebrity guide they'd like to be nudged by.  If your preference is for environmental street cred -- forest cred? coral reef cred? -- you can go avuncular with ''Life in Color With David Attenborough,'' on Netflix, or flinty with ''Greta Thunberg: A Year to Change the World,'' on PBS. If you like some Hollywood glamour with your ecology, you can listen while Sigourney Weaver narrates ''Secrets of the Whales,'' on Disney+, or travel to Asia in good company in ''Cher and the Loneliest Elephant,'' on Paramount+.  ''Secrets of the Whales'' is actually the project of an even bigger power player, the filmmaker and deep-sea diver James Cameron. (A segment on sperm whales gives him an excuse to include a clip of himself in one of his extreme submersibles.) Weaver is offscreen, but Cameron pops up in the last few minutes of each of the four episodes, ostensibly to dispense some behind-the-scenes scoop but really to hammer home the series's themes about the intelligence and community-building abilities of whales.  These ideas are pushed on us with a lack of subtlety that you could, if you were feeling uncharitable, link to Cameron's sometimes leviathan feature films (like ''Titanic,'' which also took place in the water). Weaver actually intones, ''Whales are just like us,'' with no apparent irony. It is, commendably if a bit tiresomely, a strategy to create empathy for the embattled animals. It's also a way to tie together a sprawling endeavor that took three years to film in locations ranging from the Arctic to the Antarctic and from Sri Lanka to the Caribbean.  And as constructed as the stories about ''love and tenderness and family'' can seem, ''Secrets of the Whales'' is as visually engrossing as you would expect given the time spent and talent involved. Images of napping sperm whales, suspended vertically like an underwater forest, or a pod of belugas swimming in formation with the lost narwhal that they've adopted, are thrilling; a shot of a Sisyphean tortoise struggling through the water, permanently enmeshed with what looks like a large laundry basket, is bizarre and heartbreaking.  ''Cher and the Loneliest Elephant,'' streaming beginning Thursday on Paramount+ and playing on cable May 19 on the Smithsonian Channel, is at the other end of the scale from the lushly pictorial and high-minded ''Secrets of the Whales.'' It has a bare-bones, home-movie quality, with interviews that feel as if they were shot on the run. But its 46 minutes fly by, and it is buoyed by the disarming, slightly corny sincerity that Cher brings to the proceedings.  The hero of the piece is Kaavan, an elephant whose wretched and isolated captivity in a zoo in Islamabad, Pakistan, became a social-media flash point in 2015. His plight caught Cher's attention, and the documentary chronicles the yearslong effort to find him a new home and transport him to it.  This includes some slapstick, involving the bungled attempts to build a cage strong enough to hold him during a seven-hour flight to Cambodia, and some danger -- if he got out of the cage, the plane could have crashed. And there's the haunting image of Kaavan's habitual, mesmerizing sway from side to side, a post-traumatic result of his treatment.  But he can't help taking a back seat in his own story to Cher, whose songs punctuate the more emotional moments (''Believe,'' ''Song for the Lonely'' and ''Walls,'' written for the elephant). At the height of the pandemic, the 74-year-old star, with no need for publicity, makes the 24-hour trip to Pakistan (and on to Cambodia) to be there for Operation Kaavan. Watching her serenade him, a cappella, with ''My Way'' is about as entertaining as Earth Day gets.  Attenborough doesn't do anything that diverting in the three episodes of ''Life in Color,'' but he's more of a presence here than in many of his other nature documentaries: In dad jeans and chambray shirt he trudges through the rain forest, lectures us from an Australian beach and lets a ladybird crawl over his weathered fingers. He provides occasional comic relief, suddenly looming into the frame behind a tiny, bright red, poisonous frog.  This latest project from Attenborough, who turns 95 next month, is about the importance of color in animal adaptation, and it turns away from the overtly foreboding and polemical tone that a few of his more recent series have adopted. Climate change isn't addressed until the last 10 minutes of the three-hour series.  Despite its Earth Day time slot, ''Life in Color'' is back in the business of wonderment, with a little gee-whiz technology thrown in. Attenborough marvels over the camera rigs developed for the show that can render scenes the way certain animals see them, in ultraviolet wavelengths or polarized light.  But ''Life in Color'' is mostly the same old story, the fight for love, food and territory. And as always in Attenborough's shows, these stock narratives are rendered in a succession of dazzling images, here made even more arresting because of the series's focus on varicolored plumage and skin.  If your appetite for Earth Day content is modest, the best choice would be the three hourlong episodes of ''A Year to Change the World,'' being shown in succession Thursday night on PBS stations. It follows Thunberg, then 16 and 17, as she travels the world in 2019 and 2020, giving speeches at climate conferences and educating herself -- and through the documentary, us -- in the causes of climate change and the ways in which it could be alleviated.  She declares that she does not want us to listen to her but rather listen to the science and to the retinue of climate researchers and technologists she buttonholes for the documentary. But she has the same facts everyone else has; what's unique are her charisma and the platform it has given her. And despite what she might want -- and her lack of ego seems entirely sincere -- the focus always returns to her.  Thunberg and her father, Svante, travel only by electric car, train and boat (no carbon-belching airplanes), but they manage to cover a lot of ground: disappearing glaciers in Canada, a British power plant doing pioneering work in carbon capture, a Danish farm researching how to reduce methane in cow flatulence. Thunberg is an amateur interviewer but a professional skeptic, staring down adults whose promises she doubts, from a nervously enthusiastic engineer to Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany.  One of those hopeful adults is Attenborough, who sits down with Thunberg for a grandfatherly chat. (The BBC was a producer of both ''Life in Color'' and ''A Year to Change the World.'') When Thunberg says that ''no one is listening'' to the facts about climate change, he sighs and nods, but then he says, ''people are listening,'' and cites as evidence the resurgence of whale populations. Thunberg is unfailingly polite, but you can see what she's thinking. When she asks if he has ideas for how to ''activate'' older people into environmental activism, he has nothing to offer, other than to praise her.  That's the overall effect the series will have, unless you're a confirmed Greta hater: pessimism for our future tempered by admiration, if not awe, for her preternatural poise, her tirelessness and her courage. The contrast of her seeming detachment and an evident, almost painful depth of emotion, intimately seen in the documentary, is moving. As is the thought that earth's best hope might be a feisty Swedish teenager.  David Attenborough is more of a presence in ''Life in Color,'' his new Netflix series, than he has been in many of his nature documentaries. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gavin Thurston FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003s "
335		"    An Attorney General Who Has Long Fought Police Misconduct  By Tim Arango  1,245 words 22 April 2021   16     Years before he won a murder conviction for the death of George Floyd, Mr. Ellison, the Minnesota attorney general, was a young civil rights lawyer taking on police misconduct.  MINNEAPOLIS -- As a young civil rights lawyer almost 20 years ago, Keith Ellison took on a client who accused two Minneapolis police officers of sodomizing him with a toilet plunger.  The case had echoes of an earlier police brutality case in New York, in which four officers were sent to prison in connection with the sexual assault of Abner Louima, who was attacked with a broken broom handle in a precinct bathroom.  The officers in the case involving Mr. Ellison's client, Stephen Porter, were ultimately cleared by an F.B.I. investigation. But Mr. Ellison achieved a very different outcome on Tuesday regarding another Black man's encounter with the police, when Derek Chauvin, the white former officer charged with killing George Floyd, was convicted of two counts of murder as well as manslaughter.  Mr. Ellison, 57, who grew up in Detroit and moved to Minnesota to attend law school, became the first Muslim elected to Congress in 2006 and a rising star of the progressive wing of the Democratic Party. He served in Washington for 12 years before abandoning a safe seat to run for attorney general in Minnesota in 2018, becoming the first Black person elected to statewide office. A little more than a year after taking office as attorney general, he took charge of the Chauvin case.  Mr. Ellison has long been an important voice on criminal justice issues in Minneapolis. More than a decade before he took on the Porter case, he represented the mother of Tycel Nelson, who was fatally shot by a Minneapolis police officer, winning a civil settlement. Mr. Ellison, who once led the Legal Rights Center, which offers defense counsel to indigent defendants, was also at the forefront of the racial justice movement here, and an early proponent of mediation work with street gangs and finding community-based solutions for public safety beyond traditional policing.  In prosecuting the Chauvin case, Mr. Ellison assembled a team of outside lawyers to handle motions and the presentation of evidence and testimony, and the outcome was a rarity in America: Very few prosecutors have ever convicted a police officer of murder for killing on the job.  One key to the prosecution's success, legal experts said, was that over the last several weeks of the trial, the ''blue wall of silence'' among the police -- which once stood tall when a fellow officer was accused of a crime -- appeared to crumble. One officer after another, including the police chief, took the witness stand to disavow and condemn Mr. Chauvin.  While Mr. Ellison did not speak in court, he was there most days on the prosecution side of the room, wearing a suit and often scrolling through the news feed on his phone. He was deeply involved in just about every aspect of the case, from preparing witnesses to weighing in on jury selection, said Neal Katyal, a former acting solicitor general during the Obama administration who was part of the prosecution team.  Mr. Katyal said he reached out to offer help to Mr. Ellison a few days after Mr. Floyd was killed last Memorial Day.  He described Mr. Ellison's role in the prosecution as a ''gentle steering of the ship'' that nevertheless got into the weeds at times, sending back line edits of footnotes in legal briefs Mr. Katyal had written for the case.  Through the long months of trial preparation, Mr. Katyal said, a constant message from Mr. Ellison was that their work was part of the larger arc of America's story of racial injustice. ''He viscerally felt the pain of what the community has been through,'' Mr. Katyal said, referring to Mr. Ellison's earlier days as a civil rights lawyer in Minneapolis working on police misconduct cases.  Once, in the lead-up to the trial, Mr. Ellison invited the mother of Eric Garner, who was killed in 2014 by a New York police officer who was never charged, to join the prosecution team's daily meeting. Her presence, Mr. Katyal said, highlighted how Mr. Ellison saw the Chauvin case as not merely about the death of Mr. Floyd, but also as an effort to achieve a measure of justice for all the Black families who have lost loved ones to police violence but never saw a courtroom.  ''It was so spellbinding to listen to her and say you're giving me something my son and me never got, a day in court,'' Mr. Katyal said.  As a Muslim politician, Mr. Ellison has often fought off charges of anti-Semitism over his support of the Palestinians, and when he ran for attorney general he faced attacks from some who suggested falsely that he favored imposing Shariah law. ''He faced a great deal to be where he is,'' said Jaylani Hussein, the executive director of the Minnesota chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations.  Still, while Mr. Hussein called the Chauvin conviction a landmark, he was reluctant to give Mr. Ellison too much credit because he said the evidence and public awareness of the case, especially from the harrowing bystander video, was so overwhelming that anything less than a conviction would have been a stark failure.  After the verdict in the Chauvin case was read on Tuesday afternoon, Mr. Ellison, who in the coming months will prosecute three other officers charged in Mr. Floyd's death who are scheduled to go on trial in August, was measured in his remarks. He said the outcome was simply a starting point that he hoped would lead to a wide-scale reckoning with police abuses against people of color.  ''I would not call today's verdict justice, however,'' Mr. Ellison said. ''Because justice implies there is restoration. But it is accountability, which is the first step toward justice.''  During a meeting on Tuesday night with his team, Mr. Ellison noted that he had spent some of the day with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and that Mr. Jackson had been with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. on the day he died in Memphis in 1968. Mr. Katyal said that Mr. Ellison ''drew a link'' in the meeting between what the prosecutors did over the last year in achieving justice for Mr. Floyd and the work of Dr. King and the civil rights activists of the 1960s.  In his public remarks on Tuesday, Mr. Ellison invoked the Kerner Commission, a group appointed by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1967 to investigate the causes of uprisings over racial injustice in American cities.  ''Here we are in 2021 still addressing the same problem,'' he said, before reciting the names of other Black people killed by the police, including Eric Garner, Oscar Grant, Philando Castile and Daunte Wright, who was killed by an officer in the Minneapolis suburb of Brooklyn Center during the Chauvin trial.  ''This has to end,'' Mr. Ellison continued. ''We need true justice. That's not one case. That is a social transformation that says that nobody is beneath the law and no one is above it.''  Keith Ellison, the Minnesota attorney general, has been an important voice on criminal justice issues in Minneapolis for decades. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003v "
336		"    Divided House Votes to Curb President's Travel Ban Power  By Luke Broadwater  1,214 words 22 April 2021   22     The No Ban Act would curb the president's expansive power to control immigration and bar restrictions on the basis of religion. It faces steep obstacles in the Senate.  WASHINGTON -- Pamela Raghebi of Seattle blames President Donald J. Trump's travel ban for keeping her separated from her husband, Afshin, a native of Iran, for three frustrating years.  ''My world basically turned upside down,'' Ms. Raghebi said on Wednesday in a phone interview, recalling how the blockade Mr. Trump imposed on travelers from predominantly Muslim countries had stranded her spouse overseas. ''They scapegoated a whole culture throughout the world. That can't be allowed to happen again.''  House Democrats moved on Wednesday to try to prevent that from happening. Voting 218 to 208, mostly along party lines, the House passed legislation known as the No Ban Act that would restrict the president's wide-ranging power to control immigration by requiring that travel bans be temporary and subject to congressional oversight. It also would explicitly bar any such edict based on religion.  The House also approved, 217 to 207, entirely along party lines, a related measure that would require that certain immigrants be allowed access to a lawyer when they are detained at ports of entry, such as airports.  Republicans opposed both bills; just one of them, Representative Brian Fitzpatrick of Pennsylvania, crossed party lines to support the No Ban measure. They argued that controls on immigration should be tightened, not relaxed, given the crush of migration through the southwestern border.  ''Are Democrats working to repair the crisis?'' Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the Republican leader, asked on the House floor Wednesday. ''Are they working to stop the mass flow of illegal migration? No.''  The bills face an uncertain future in an evenly split Senate, where a backlog of House-passed bills on immigration and other topics face steep obstacles. But advocates say they send a clear message that America cannot go back to the days of Mr. Trump, who called during his presidential campaign for ''a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States,'' and then strove to put those words into action once he took office.  ''We cannot allow any president to abuse the power of his or her office,'' Speaker Nancy Pelosi said on the floor.  The measures were inspired by the harsh and abrupt steps Mr. Trump took at the start of his presidency to clamp down on the entry of foreigners into the country, which led to chaos at U.S. airports and a rush of legal challenges. In January 2017, he denied entry to citizens of seven majority-Muslim countries. Amid court challenges, Mr. Trump later amended the ban, expanding it to include some countries that are not predominantly Muslim, such as North Korea.  President Biden, who reversed Mr. Trump's travel bans after taking office, is backing the legislation.  ''Those bans were a stain on our national conscience and are inconsistent with our long history of welcoming people of all faiths,'' said a formal statement of support issued by the White House this week.  But the statement said the administration reserved the right to restrict travel from specific countries if necessary.  ''The administration stands ready to work with the Congress to adopt a solution that protects against unfair religious discrimination while also ensuring the executive branch has the flexibility necessary to respond to serious threats to security and public health, and emergent international crises,'' the statement said.  Representative Mary Gay Scanlon, Democrat of Pennsylvania, said she could never forget the hardship inflicted on travelers by Mr. Trump's bans, which she called ''illegal and ill conceived,'' and discriminatory against Muslims.  ''Families were separated,'' she said. ''Many were denied the right to counsel.''  Still, the legislation comes at a difficult political moment for Mr. Biden and Democrats on immigration.  Representative Guy Reschenthaler, Republican of Pennsylvania, argued on Tuesday that the No Ban Act would weaken national security, and that the requirement that travelers have access to counsel ''complicates the job of Border Patrol agents'' and would cost millions of dollars.  The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the bill would cost $825 million to implement over five years.  ''This bill does nothing to address the Biden border crisis,'' he said, using the label Republicans have adopted. Similar problems also existed under Mr. Trump.  The votes Wednesday are the latest steps the Democratic-led House has taken in recent weeks to try to overhaul the nation's immigration system.  Last month, the House voted to create a path to citizenship for an estimated four million undocumented immigrants.  In one bill, lawmakers moved to set up a permanent legal pathway for more than 2.5 million unauthorized immigrants, including those brought to the United States as children known as Dreamers, and others granted Temporary Protected Status for humanitarian reasons. Lawmakers also approved a measure that would eventually grant legal status to close to a million farmworkers and their families while updating a key agricultural visa program.  While some Republicans there have pledged support for Dreamers in the past, their party is increasingly uniting behind a hard-line strategy to deny Mr. Biden the votes he needs to make any new immigration law and use the problems at the border as a political weapon.  The Biden administration has come under criticism for its immigration positions from both the right and the left.  Mr. Biden angered Democrats across the country on Friday when White House officials said he would limit the number of refugees allowed into the United States this year to the historically low level set by the Trump administration, reversing an earlier promise to welcome more than 60,000 people fleeing war and persecution.  The move to cap the number at 15,000 prompted such an immediate backlash from Democrats and human rights activists that the White House later retreated and promised to announce an increased number by May 15.  Even though Mr. Biden reversed Mr. Trump's travel ban, he has not approved an expedited waiver process to reunite separated spouses such as the Raghebis, said Avideh Moussavian, the legislative director at the National Immigration Law Center.  ''The actual work of undoing the damage and the harm was not going to happen on Day 1,'' Ms. Moussavian said. ''We have been urging the administration to ensure there's an efficient, expedited path for those applicants to have their cases reconsidered. People have been left on their own on navigating a system that at this point they are justified in having little faith in.''  Ms. Raghebi, who sued the Trump administration over Mr. Raghebi's situation, said she was hopeful that her husband of 10 years would get home soon. She has been talking to him every day on the phone, and she wants him to meet a new grandchild in the family.  ''There's so much about my husband that I miss,'' she said. ''I get very anxious about the future. If he can come home, I would have the most lovely birthday.''  Pamela Raghebi blamed former President Donald J. Trump's travel ban for stranding her husband abroad for three years. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEN LAMBERT/THE SEATTLE TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003i "
337		"    Antagonist of the Amazon Wants Billions to Save It  By Manuela Andreoni and Ernesto Londoño  1,467 words 22 April 2021   9     The Biden era has prompted Brazil to take steps to repair its record as an environmental scoundrel -- for which it's seeking billions of dollars from the international community.  This story was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer Center's Rainforest Investigations Network.  RIO DE JANEIRO -- As the Biden administration rallies the international community to curb global warming in a climate change summit this week, Brazil is pledging to play a critical role, going as far as promising to end illegal deforestation by 2030.  There's a catch: Brazil's president, Jair Bolsonaro, wants the international community to pledge billions of dollars to pay for the conservation initiatives.  And donors are reluctant to provide the money, since Brazil under the Bolsonaro administration has been busy doing the opposite of conservation, gutting the country's environmental protection system, undermining Indigenous rights and championing industries driving the destruction of the rainforest.  ''He wants new money with no real constraints,'' said Marcio Astrini, who heads the Climate Observatory, an environmental protection organization in Brazil. ''This is not a trustworthy government: not on democracy, not on the coronavirus and far less so on the Amazon.''  For two years, Mr. Bolsonaro seemed unbothered by his reputation as an environmental villain.  Under Mr. Bolsonaro's watch, deforestation in the Amazon rainforest, by far the largest in the world, has risen to the highest level in over a decade. The destruction, which has been driven by loggers clearing land for cattle grazing and for illegal mining operations, sparked global outrage in 2019 as huge wildfires raged for weeks.  The Trump administration turned a blind eye to Brazil's environmental record under Mr. Bolsonaro, a close ally of the former American president.  After the White House changed hands in January, the United States began pressuring Brazil to rein in deforestation, joining the European Union, Norway and others in warning that its worsening reputation hampers the country's economic potential.  ''We want to see concrete results,'' Todd Chapman, the United States ambassador to Brazil, told a group of Brazilian business leaders earlier this month. ''Illegal loggers and miners, all this illegal activity, why do you want to pay the bill for that?''  Soon after President Biden took office, senior officials in his administration began meeting with Mr. Bolsonaro's minister of the environment, Ricardo Salles, in an effort to seek common ground before the climate meeting this month.  The closed-door meetings were seen with trepidation by environmentalists, who deeply distrust the Bolsonaro administration. The talks prompted frantic campaigns by activists intent on warning American officials not to trust the Brazilian government.  The Americans also needed to smooth feathers that had been ruffled during the presidential campaign. After Mr. Biden declared during a debate that he would seek to raise $20 billion to save the Amazon, Mr. Bolsonaro bristled, calling it a ''cowardly threat against our territorial and economic integrity.''  Yet the Brazilian president struck a far more conciliatory tone in a seven-page letter he sent Mr. Biden earlier this month.  ''We have before us a great challenge with the increase in deforestation rates in the Amazon,'' Mr. Bolsonaro wrote in the April 14 letter, which argues that Brazil's reputation as an environmental malefactor is undeserved.  Addressing that challenge, the Brazilian leader added, will require a ''massive investment.''  For starters, Mr. Salles said in an interview in March, the government would be happy to get the $20 billion Mr. Biden proposed, calling the sum ''proportionate to the challenges we have in the Amazon.''  If the international community steps up, Mr. Salles said, ''we will line up a series of actions that can bring quick results.''  Mr. Bolsonaro's new commitment to fight deforestation -- which effectively reinstates a commitment by the Brazilian government that his administration had abandoned -- also comes as his government is beset by a deepening health and economic crisis from the Covid-19 pandemic, which continues to kill thousands of Brazilians each day.  The about-face, and the demand for cash up front, was met with skepticism among foreign diplomats in Brazil and environmentalists, who argue that Brazil's only real deficit is one of political will.  European and British diplomats have been working for months to pressure the Bolsonaro administration into committing to protect the environment before November's United Nations climate summit.  Suely Araújo, a former head of Ibama, Brazil's main environmental protection agency, said the government has access to hundreds of millions of dollars that could be spent on conservation efforts in short order.  They include a fund for Amazon protection efforts that Norway and Germany froze in 2019 after Mr. Bolsonaro's government criticized some of the projects and dismantled safeguards to ensure the money was used effectively.  ''The shamelessness of the government to ask for resources abroad is striking,'' Ms. Araújo said. ''Why won't he use the money that's there?''  Environmental and Indigenous organizations have expressed deep skepticism about Mr. Bolsonaro's professed willingness to fight deforestation and they have warned international donors to refrain from giving the Brazilian government money they fear could be used to undermine environmental protection.  In recent weeks, environmentalists have raised the alarm, and celebrities -- including the Brazilian singer Caetano Veloso and the American actor Leonardo DiCaprio -- signed a letter that conveyed ''profound concern'' about the talks.  There is no sign that the Biden administration is considering offering to fund deforestation efforts on a significant scale, which would require support from Congress.  Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, said last week that the United States does not expect to announce a bilateral agreement with Brazil at this week's climate summit.  ''We do want to see a clear commitment to ending illegal deforestation, tangible steps to increase effective enforcement of illegal deforestation, and a political signal that illegal deforestation and encroachment will not be tolerated,'' she told reporters last week.  Ms. Psaki added that the United States believes it is ''realistic for Brazil to achieve a real decrease in deforestation by the end of the 2021 fire season'' in the Amazon, which typically begins around August.  Experts say there is little reason to be optimistic.  The yearly budget plan that the Bolsonaro administration recently submitted to Congress includes the lowest level of funding for environmental agencies in two decades, according to an analysis by Climate Observatory.  After the country's vice president, Hamilton Mourão, announced the government's first target for deforestation reduction earlier this month, experts pointed out that reaching the goal would leave Brazil by the end of 2022 with a level of deforestation 16 percent higher than the one Mr. Bolsonaro inherited in 2019.  The Bolsonaro administration is backing a bill that would give land grabbers amnesty, a move that would open up a swath of the Amazon at least the size of France to largely unregulated development. Another initiative it is pressing in Congress would make it easier for companies to get environmental licenses and would pave the way for legal mining operations in Indigenous territories.  And there is deep distrust toward Mr. Salles among environmentalists and public servants in the field. A senior federal police official in the Amazon recently accused the minister of obstructing a law enforcement operation against illegal loggers.  Private sector leaders are among the most concerned over the government's record on the environment. Though China buys almost a third of Brazil's exports, Americans are crucial investors in companies whose supply chains are vulnerable to deforestation.  In an open letter, the heads of dozens of major Brazilian companies, including the meatpacker JBS and the Itaú bank, urged the government to set more ambitious carbon emission reduction targets.  ''Any work that reduces illegal deforestation benefits the private sector,'' said Marcello Brito, the president of the Brazilian Agribusiness Association, which was among the signatories. ''What I fear is a boycott by the market.''  That's a prospect Mr. Chapman, the American ambassador, has underscored.  ''If things don't go well, it's not about what happens with the American government, it's about what happens with the world,'' he said. ''Many companies in the United States now, their shareholders are demanding an answer.''  This story was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer Center's Rainforest Investigations Network.  Top, the burning pasture of a cattle farm set ablaze a neighboring forest area in the Amazon region in 2019. Above, logs of fine wood were prepared to be loaded onto a raft. Logging, clearing land for grazing and mining drive deforestation. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR MORIYAMA FOR THE new_york_times); President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil wants the international community to fund preservation of the Amazon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVARISTO SA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00035 "
338		"    Chadian Rebels Pulled Off Unexpected Coup by Preparing in Libya Civil War  By Declan Walsh  1,360 words 22 April 2021   9     Fighting as mercenaries for years, the rebels were ready to pull off their own stunning feat: an invasion that resulted in the death of Chad's strongman ruler.  NAIROBI, Kenya -- The rebels pulled off a stunning feat. Barely a week after their armed convoy roared across the desert into northern Chad, they kicked off a battle that on Monday claimed the biggest scalp of all: Idriss Déby, Chad's iron-fisted president of three decades, killed on the battlefield when a shell exploded near his vehicle, according to a senior aide.  On Wednesday, a day after his death was announced, a sense of apprehension and disbelief reverberated through the capital, Ndjamena, where the military formally installed as interim president Mr. Déby's 37-year-old son, Mahamat Idriss Déby. Rumors of an impending rebel attack on the city coursed through its streets.  But the secret of the rebels' striking success thus far lay behind them, across Chad's northern border in Libya, where they have been fighting as soldiers of fortune for years, amassing weapons, money and battlefield experience, according to United Nations investigators, regional experts and Chadian officials. In effect, the rebels used Libya's chaotic war to prepare for their own campaign in Chad.  Until recently they were employed by Khalifa Hifter, a powerful Libyan commander once championed by President Donald J. Trump. They fought with weapons supplied by the United Arab Emirates, one of Mr. Hifter's main foreign sponsors.  And they were based last year at a sprawling Libyan military air base alongside mercenaries from the Wagner Group, the Kremlin-backed private company that is considered a spearhead for Russia's covert efforts to spread its military influence across Africa.  Experts say the unexpected coup by the Chadian rebels offers a stark example of how the decade-old power vacuum in Libya, starting with the ouster of the dictator Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in 2011, has incubated an array of mercenaries and other armed groups, some of which are now spreading chaos in the region.  ''The civil war in Libya has created an environment in which armed groups, not just from Chad but from all over the place, can thrive and find sponsors and allies,'' said Nathaniel Powell, a research associate at the Center for War and Diplomacy at Lancaster University in Britain, and the author of ''France's Wars in Chad.''  Uncertainty has seized Chad since the death of Mr. Déby, casting doubt on the stability of a nation viewed by the United States and France as a linchpin of their efforts to counter Islamist militancy spreading across western and central Africa.  In a statement on Wednesday the rebels, who go by the name Front for Change and Concord in Chad (F.A.C.T., by its French acronym), threatened to march on Ndjamena this weekend, following Mr. Déby's funeral planned for Friday.  Whether the rebels can deliver on that threat is unclear. They suffered heavy losses early this week -- Chad's military claimed to have killed 300 rebels -- and foreign military officials are unsure how far the rebel force is from the capital.  Even so, the Chadian military fortified the defenses around the presidential palace on Wednesday, where officials denied persistent rumors that Mr. Déby's successor, his son Mahamat, had also been killed or injured.  ''If he has been shot or dead, that means he's a good actor, because he is alive and kicking,'' said Acheikh Ibn-Oumar, a senior presidential adviser who said he was speaking from inside the palace.  There are still questions about the circumstances of the elder Mr. Déby's death, and whether he was in fact killed by a rival. But Mr. Ibn-Oumar, echoing statements by military leaders, insisted the president was killed when a rebel shell exploded near his vehicle near Nokou, 170 miles north of Ndjamena.  Mr. Déby was killed on the day he won his sixth election, marred by irregularities. Western countries had largely overlooked his dismal record of corruption and rights abuses because he was a bulwark against the rising tide of Islamist militancy in the Sahel, an arid swath bordering the Sahara that spans six African countries.  France has had a continued military presence in Ndjamena since 1986, and its counterterrorism operation in the Sahel, known as Operation Barkhane, has been headquartered in Chad's capital since its launch in 2014. France says at least 1,000 of its soldiers are currently based in Chad.  But the rebels looking to overthrow Mr. Déby represented an array of local grievances against the iron-fisted, 31-year rule of an old-fashioned African strongman accused by critics of squandering Chad's considerable oil revenues, leaving it among the poorest countries on earth.  Since the 1990s an array of rebel groups, many defined by ethnic identity, have sought to overthrow him. Some were based in the Darfur region of western Sudan, where they received funding and weapons from the Sudanese dictator Omar Hassan al-Bashir.  After Mr. al-Bashir and Mr. Deby struck a peace deal in 2010 and agreed to stop backing rebels fighting each other's governments, the Chadian rebels were forced to leave Sudan. They found a new base, a year later, in Libya.  In the chaos that followed the ouster and death of Col. Qaddafi in 2011, rival Libyan factions hired African mercenaries to fight alongside their own forces. The Chadians, who have a reputation as dogged desert fighters, were in high demand.  Some Chadians even swapped sides, if the price was right.  The F.A.C.T. started out with out with a Libyan faction based in the central city of Misurata, said a United Nations official who has spoken with the group's leadership, but was not authorized to speak to the media. But by 2019 they had switched their support to a rival faction, led by Mr. Hifter, which had launched a campaign to seize the capital, Tripoli.  The Chadians are by no means the best-known foreign mercenaries in Libya. Far greater attention has been paid to the Russian and Syrian fighters who played a key role in Mr. Hifter's push for Tripoli.  But the money, weapons and experience gathered by African mercenaries, mostly from Chad and Sudan, is now being put to use in other countries.  A U.N. report published in February noted that F.A.C.T. fighters were based at a major military air base in Al Jufra, in central Libya -- an airfield that is also a hub for Russian mercenaries from the Wagner group, which has received cargo flights carrying weapons from the United Arab Emirates, the report notes.  The U.N. also noted that an airplane owned by Erik Prince, the former Blackwater owner who organized an ill-fated $80 million mercenary operation for Mr. Hifter, had been photographed at the Jufra air base.  Following the collapse last year of Mr. Hifter's assault on Tripoli, the warring factions in Libya signed a cease-fire agreement in October that has mostly held.  As the fighting in Libya ended, the Chadian fighters returned home for the uprising they launched against Mr. Déby on April 11. They may have brought some of the advanced weaponry from Libya with them, said Cameron Hudson, a former State Department official now at the Atlantic Council, a research body in Washington.  He said that the Chadians appeared to be traveling in the same kind of armored vehicles that the Emiratis had donated to Mr. Hifter.  The U.N. official said that, even at the height of the Libyan war, the rebels had always intended to go home to Chad.  ''That's their real interest,'' he said. ''They talked about gathering as many weapons as they could and going back to Chad.''  Mahamat Adamou contributed reporting from Ndjamena, Chad, and Elian Peltier from London.  President Idriss Deby at a campaign rally in April. Mr. Déby was killed on the day he won his sixth election (PHOTOGRAPH BY Joel Kouam/EPA, via Shutterstock FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003f "
339		"    War, Peace and Spreadsheets In a Countdown to Withdrawal  By Thomas Gibbons-Neff  1,340 words 22 April 2021   12     The Taliban have been recording and contesting every perceived U.S. violation of the troop withdrawal deal.  DOHA, Qatar -- In the twilight months of the United States' war in Afghanistan, Americans fought the Taliban, not over fields or villages or hearts and minds, but over spreadsheets.  Since February 2020, when the United States signed an agreement with the Taliban laying out the terms of withdrawal from Afghanistan if certain conditions were met, the insurgent group has recorded its every perceived violation of the deal, totaling well over 1,000 incidents laid out in Microsoft Excel.  Practically every week, the Taliban delivered these lists of infractions to U.S. diplomats and military officials in Doha, Qatar, who took the complaints -- investigating some and dismissing others as inaccurate.  In a way, the spreadsheets' very existence supported President Biden's rationale for pulling out completely, even when his generals wanted to stay: A conditions-based withdrawal, as the Pentagon wanted, seemed bound to fail because neither side could agree on whether the other party was even meeting the conditions they had signed on to.  After 20 years of killing one another, in suicide attacks, drone strikes, roadside bomb blasts, night raids and ground offensives, both sides understood the war on almost completely different terms.  Mr. Biden's decision to withdraw all U.S. forces by Sept. 11 -- months beyond the May 1 withdrawal date outlined in the 2020 agreement -- has sent most diplomatic entreaties into disarray. U.S. negotiators have returned to the United States, top Taliban officials are now in Pakistan. High-profile peace talks scheduled for next week in Turkey were postponed on Tuesday, as the Taliban said they would not attend. And the Afghans are bracing for what could be a bloody summer.  But still, the Taliban are still adding to their Excel documents as each day passes.  The 2020 deal, Taliban officials said, calls for Afghan security forces to cease offensive operations with U.S. support, while the Taliban are not supposed to carry out offensives into provincial capitals. Taliban suicide attacks are also forbidden. Artillery and airstrikes, by both the U.S. and Afghan security forces, are banned outside of where there is fighting, though most U.S. airstrikes are to defend besieged Afghan troops, which is allowed under the deal.  The Taliban claim that they are upholding the deal, which still stands post-Biden announcement. The United States often denies any responsibility for the violations that the Taliban identify, as they are usually said to have been committed by Afghan forces. Meanwhile, the Americans see the insurgents' repeated attacks on villages and towns, unclaimed targeted killings and brazen offensives in the country's south as clear infractions.  In at times contentious meetings, both sides have thrown accusations at one another, one U.S. official said, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.  Still, some American officials believe that the months of disputes -- which took place quietly twice a week, sometimes on WhatsApp and other times in luxury Qatari hotels -- can still be the foundation to further negotiate a reduction in violence that would last 90 days. The plan is a last-ditch attempt to stave off a deadly summer insurgent offensive and stabilize the battlefield as the last American forces leave -- if the Taliban are willing to come back to the table.  By announcing the withdrawal, the Biden administration has given up much of the United States' negotiating leverage, but it still has one last carrot and stick up its sleeve that could get the Taliban onboard: U.S. envoys could agree to push for the release of 7,000 Taliban prisoners (though the Afghan government is likely to refuse to comply, especially in the wake of the announcement) and the removal of United Nations sanctions against the insurgent group.  It seems possible the end of America's longest war on foreign soil will not end in a bang, or a whimper, but instead with representatives from an insurgent group and those of a superpower sitting across a table, debating spreadsheets.  To understand just how convoluted these discussions have been, The new_york_times reviewed several of the spreadsheets, comparing the collection of incidents from June 2020 with its own reporting collected through the weekly Afghan war casualty reports, and was able to verify seven of the incidents that involved civilians, out of the more than 110 violations claimed by the Taliban for the month. (The Times does not record reports of Taliban casualties, of which many of their documented offenses claim to be. In the past, the Taliban have exaggerated or lied about casualty claims, so The Times is only printing the incident items it was able to verify, though the Taliban's details differ from government or local accounts.)  A look into four of these seven incidents shows that even when these cases are put under a microscope, the bare facts of what happened and who's to blame are still almost impossible to discern -- the byproduct of the war's unending stream of competing narratives.  Violation 231  Unknown gunmen entered a home in the Altamor area of Pul-e-Alam, Logar Province's capital, and opened fire on family members, killing a mother and three of her daughters, according to local officials at the time. The father of the family was also wounded. The Taliban, however, attributed the attack on the family to an artillery strike. Though officials at the time promised an investigation, Deedar Lawang, the provincial spokesman, recently said they still have not determined who carried out the killings.  When told that The Times had reported the incident as being carried out by gunmen and not an artillery strike, a Taliban spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid said, ''All the recorded incidents are considered a violation by Taliban standards and reporting.''  Violation 244  By all accounts from officials in Kapisa Province's district of Tagab, a mountainous province just north of Kabul, the country's capital, the deaths of 11 Afghan security forces and three civilians were the result of a Taliban offensive into several villages on the night of June 14.  The Taliban's account is that nine civilians were also wounded, during ''artillery fire on a wedding.'' But local officials said that three civilians were killed and eight others were wounded when a Taliban mortar round hit a house.  Violation 262  On June 18, a mortar round exploded in the yard of a madrasa, or religious school, in Takhar Province's Ishkamish District, killing nine students and wounding six others, according to local officials. It was unclear if the children were playing with the shell, but last week, Khalil Asir, a police spokesman, said the mortar round had been concealed in a sack.  The Taliban often use mosques as central to their fighters' operations: not just as a meeting place, but also where weapons and munitions are sometimes stored. But their incident report said that ''the enemy planted a mine next to the mosque,'' implying that Afghan security forces, backed by the United States, deliberately planted the round near the madrasa.  Violation 307  Several rounds of artillery landed in a livestock market in Sangin District, a volatile area in Helmand Province, killing 23 civilians and wounding 40 others on June 29, according to local officials. Residents of the area, which was under Taliban control, blamed government forces, while government officials blamed the insurgent group. Later on, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and the United Nations determined that government forces had fired the mortar rounds in response to a Taliban attack on their base.  Though the Afghan government's investigation still has not been made public, last week, Fawad Aman, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defense, said the government's investigation attributed the attack to the Taliban.  Fahim Abed and Najim Rahim contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan  Members of the Taliban in Alingar District, Afghanistan, last year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM HUYLEBROEK FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003b "
340		"    Other Officers' Trial Expected in August  By Lucy Tompkins  416 words 22 April 2021   17     Thomas Lane, J. Alexander Kueng and Tou Thao were charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder and aiding and abetting second-degree manslaughter and are expected to be tried jointly beginning in August.  Now that the former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin has been found guilty in the murder of George Floyd, attention is turning to the coming trial of the other three officers who were involved in the arrest. All three were fired the day after Mr. Floyd's death, and they are expected to be tried jointly beginning in August.  On June 3, Hennepin County prosecutors charged Thomas Lane, J. Alexander Kueng and Tou Thao with aiding and abetting second-degree murder and aiding and abetting second-degree manslaughter.  Mr. Kueng and Mr. Lane, both newly trained officers, arrived at the scene first and approached Mr. Floyd's car. Mr. Lane drew his handgun and pointed it at Mr. Floyd through an open window, putting the gun back in his holster after Mr. Floyd put his hands on the steering wheel.  Mr. Thao and Mr. Chauvin arrived later, when the first two officers were trying to get Mr. Floyd into the squad car. Once Mr. Floyd was on the ground, Mr. Lane held his legs, and Mr. Kueng held his back. Mr. Thao stood nearby and interacted with bystanders.  Mr. Lane and Mr. Kueng were both in their first week on the job as full officers. Mr. Kueng, who was 26 at the time, was the youngest and least experienced officer at the scene. It was his third shift as a full officer. He was trained largely by Mr. Chauvin. Neither Mr. Kueng nor Mr. Lane had prior misconduct complaints filed against them, according to the Minneapolis Police Department.  Mr. Thao, who was 34 at the time of Mr. Floyd's arrest, had been with the Minneapolis Police Department for nine years. He faced six misconduct complaints in his career with the department. He also was the subject of a lawsuit that claimed that he and another officer punched, kicked and kneed a Black man, leaving him with broken teeth and bruises. A lawyer involved in the case said the city settled the case by agreeing to pay $25,000.  From left: The former Minneapolis police officers Tou Thao, J. Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hennepin County Jail, via Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003q "
341		"    Congress, Buoyed by the Floyd Verdict, Resurrects Its Bid to Overhaul Policing  By Catie Edmondson and Nicholas Fandos  1,507 words 22 April 2021   15     A bipartisan effort to change policing practices collapsed last summer after George Floyd's murder by a white officer. Can a ''guilty'' verdict and President Biden's call for action resurrect it?  WASHINGTON -- A day after a white Minneapolis police officer was found guilty of murdering George Floyd, a Black man, lawmakers in both parties said they were cautiously optimistic that the verdict could provide new momentum in Congress to overcome the hurdles that have thwarted a far-reaching police overhaul.  In a speech on Tuesday night at the White House, President Biden formally called on lawmakers to resurrect the bill known as the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, Democrats' expansive measure to address the use of excessive force and racial discrimination, pledging to sign it into law ''as quickly as possible.'' The bill, co-written by Vice President Kamala Harris when she was a senator, has languished for almost a year amid partisan differences.  ''We're going to stay at it until we get it done,'' the president assured Mr. Floyd's family in call after the verdict.  On Capitol Hill, key lawmakers in both parties said on Wednesday that the conviction may have opened a rare window of opportunity to break the stalemate. In the clearest sign of progress, Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina, Republicans' lead emissary on the issue, said that a bipartisan group of lawmakers was ''on the verge'' of a compromise in the coming weeks, although the details were murky.  ''I am interested in making a difference. I do not care about making a point,'' Representative Karen Bass, Democrat of California and the lead author of her party's legislation, said in an interview, signaling flexibility on a potential deal. ''I can make a point and stand on a high horse, but that doesn't get me anywhere.''  But to do so, the two parties would have to resolve the same stubborn ideological and political differences that blunted past efforts.  Democrats have pressed for aggressive federal intervention to curb abuses in policing. But they have stopped short of trying to defund police departments, as some of the most progressive lawmakers have advocated.  Republicans have pushed back on such prescriptive measures, saying the federal government should not mandate how the police do their jobs, only offer incentives and training. And they have worked to portray Democrats as anti-law-enforcement extremists, a potent line of attack during last year's elections.  Ms. Bass and Mr. Scott, who have been in quiet talks for weeks to find a compromise, have yet to win the backing of party leaders on a roster of divisive issues. The chief sticking point continues to be Democrats' demand to alter the legal liability shield for individual police officers, known as qualified immunity, to make it easier to bring civil lawsuits against them for wrongdoing. The two sides are also at odds over a proposal to change the federal code to make criminal prosecution of individual officers easier.  Hopes that lawmakers would respond to the national outcry for reform initially fell apart last summer after Senate Republicans refused to take up the George Floyd measure and Democrats blocked their attempt to pass more modest legislation led by Mr. Scott. His package would have encouraged state and local police departments to change their practices, including penalizing those that did not require the use of body cameras and limiting the use of chokeholds. It would not have altered the qualified immunity doctrine or placed new federal restrictions on the use of lethal force.  In addition to curtailing qualified immunity and easing prosecution of misconduct, Democrats' bill would directly mandate more changes to departments, including restrictions on the use of deadly force except as a last resort. The House passed it last month almost entirely along party lines.  Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, told reporters on Tuesday that Republicans were ''still open to looking at police reform'' but that their ideas ''ought not to be just summarily dismissed in the process.'' He hammered Democrats for using the filibuster last year to block Mr. Scott's bill.  But amid the public sparring, Ms. Bass, Mr. Scott and a smattering of other interested lawmakers have been working quietly to bridge the divide. They include members of the bipartisan House Problem Solvers Caucus -- led by one of the group's chairmen, Representative Josh Gottheimer, Democrat of New Jersey, and Representative Pete Stauber, Republican of Minnesota and a retired police lieutenant.  Lawmakers involved in the talks are said to be studying a law passed last year by Colorado that limited the ability of police officers to use qualified immunity as a defense against liability in state courts. Police unions and their allies fiercely oppose such change, and used the issue to drive a stake through Democrats' bill last summer.  Mr. Scott signaled on Wednesday that he was working on a potential compromise that would make it easier for victims or their families to sue police departments, but not individual officers. Many jurisdictions already allow such lawsuits, and the details of his proposal were not immediately clear, but Mr. Scott said that Democrats had been ''quite receptive.''  ''There is a way to put more of the onus or the burden on the department or on the employer than on the employee,'' he told reporters. ''I think that would be a very logical step forward.''  Mr. Scott said he would still not consider any changes that would make it easier to criminally prosecute officers, as Democrats have insisted.  At the White House, Mr. Biden has deployed senior members of his team to prod along a compromise. Susan Rice, his domestic policy adviser; Cedric L. Richmond, his chief of public outreach; and Louisa Terrell, his legislative affairs director, have spoken with lawmakers about the bill in recent days, according to a senior official.  Democrats, in particular, have new reasons for optimism. Unlike a year ago, they can now count on a president of their own party who has made addressing systemic racism a priority of his administration. In Ms. Harris, they have an enthusiastic proponent of the legislation who is now in a position to play a crucial role. They also now have control of the Senate, allowing them to set the agenda for what bills come up for a vote and when.  Mr. Scott is in a trickier spot. The lone Black Republican in the Senate, he has spoken eloquently about his own experiences with police profiling, and he leaped at the opportunity last year to draft his party's response to the wave of unrest.  But Mr. Scott is now facing re-election in a conservative Southern state where he could be targeted in a primary from the right. Taking a prominent role in pushing legislation backed by Democrats to rein in police wrongdoing could carry heavy political risks for him.  Republicans have continued the barrage of attacks painting Democrats as anti-police, and they could be unwilling to cut any deals that would dilute their attempts to press the theme in the 2022 midterm elections.  Beyond the political considerations, a vast gap remains between how the two parties regard the issues of race and policing. Democrats have argued that the recent deaths of Black people in confrontations with the police have exposed a fundamentally racist justice system that must be addressed on a broad scale. While some Republicans have conceded that racism plays a role, most have instead said that the problem is individual wrongdoing by rogue police officers.  Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, criticized Mr. Biden on Tuesday night for suggesting that Mr. Floyd's murder exposed ''systemic racism'' plaguing the nation.  ''It was a verdict against one officer based on individual facts in one case,'' Mr. Cornyn wrote on Twitter. ''I accept the verdict. No need to slander law enforcement generally, and the vast majority of police officers that risk their lives to protect public safety.''  At the same time, any move to scale back the policing measure as part of a bipartisan deal could backfire in the House, where progressive lawmakers have already signaled that the Democratic bill is insufficient to address the issues at hand. With Democrats operating on the thinnest of margins, defections could prove fatal to an eventual compromise bill.  ''This is not about cameras and retraining and choke holds,'' Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, said on Tuesday night. ''This is about changing how we structure our society and the value of Black life. So yeah, there's legislation in here that's not bad, that's important, that should be passed. But even a lot of that doesn't hit the core.''  Katie Rogers contributed reporting.  Katie Rogers contributed reporting.  A crowd gathered outside the courthouse in Minneapolis on Tuesday after the guilty verdict in the trial of Derek Chauvin. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSHUA RASHAAD MCFADDEN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003n "
342		"    Nuclear Plant Shutdown  561 words 22 April 2021   24     Environmental groups write that gains in energy efficiency and renewable power exceed the plant's annual output. Also: Stewardship of wild horses; yeshiva graduates' success.  To the Editor:  Re ''Nuclear Plant's Shutdown Means More Fossil Fuel in New York'' (news article, April 13):  New York State is making good on its promise to replace the aging, unsafe Indian Point nuclear plant with clean energy. Gains in energy efficiency and renewable power over the last decade already exceed the plant's total annual output, with much more to come.  We can expect year-to-year changes given fluctuations in energy demand and prices. But the overall trend in New York is clear: Clean energy is here to stay, and emissions reductions are on track to reach the state's ambitious climate goals.  Closing this dangerous plant is overdue. Over the years Indian Point has experienced reactor structure problems with the potential for structural failure, as well as leaks, fires and unplanned shutdowns.  For the 20 million people who live within 50 miles of it, Indian Point's long-planned closure ends a risky chapter.  Paul Gallay  Kit Kennedy  Mr. Gallay is president of Riverkeeper and Ms. Kennedy is senior director, climate and clean energy program, at the Natural Resources Defense Council.  Managing Wild Horses  To the Editor:  Re ''The Next Level in Office Amenities: Mustangs'' (Square Feet, Business, April 14):  Not surprisingly, companies at the Tahoe-Reno Industrial Center in Nevada, including Tesla, are wooing prospective employees by promising spectacular views of wild horses. In a state where livestock outnumbers wild horses by at least 10 to 1, the 47,000 remaining wild horses symbolize a pioneer spirit that is quintessentially American.  Nevertheless, the federal Bureau of Land Management continues to spend more than $60 million a year in an endless cycle of removing horses from the range (which typically involves stampeding the horses by helicopter) and holding them in government-run corrals.  The bureau would be wise to look more closely at successful public-private partnerships, including leveraging the resources of companies that care about stewardship, to manage these herds. Humane fertility control methods, like the porcine zona pellucida immuno-contraceptive vaccine, can effectively curb population growth while substantially lowering the costs for taxpayers.  Joanna Grossman  Washington  The writer is equine program manager for the Animal Welfare Institute.  Professional Success After a Yeshiva Education  To the Editor:  Re ''My Son's Yeshiva Is Breaking the Law'' (Opinion video, nytimes.com, April 7):  Those who have rejected Orthodox Jewish practice have become the most vocal critics of Orthodox Jewish education. More important are the voices of the parents in New York State who each year choose yeshiva education for more than 165,000 children.  We are very proud of their professional success. Many run businesses, while others become entrepreneurs, executives or teachers. Yeshiva graduates have created jobs for tens of thousands of New Yorkers, and tens of thousands of yeshiva graduates have built their homes and raised their families in New York. That is success.  Our critics are not satisfied, but that is because what concerns them is not our literacy but our way of life.  (Rabbi) David Niederman  Brooklyn  The writer is president of United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg and North Brooklyn.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Justin Lane/European Pressphoto Agency FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00039 "
343		"    Can Covid Shots Affect Periods?  By Alice Lu-Culligan and Randi Hutter Epstein  986 words 22 April 2021   25     We do know that researchers do not study menstruation enough.  It took a pandemic to get people to talk about menstruation.  A spate of reports from women stating that their periods changed after they got their coronavirus vaccines has left many women worried that the jab is affecting their cycle.  So far, there's no data linking the vaccines to changes in menstruation. Even if there is a connection, one unusual period is no cause for alarm. There is a long list of triggers that can cause changes to the menstrual cycle, including stress, illness and changes in diet and physical activity.  But that raises the question: If so many things can affect periods, why don't we know more about how these vaccines -- or any others -- affect menstruation? It's part of a long history of medicine not taking women's bodies seriously.  Clinical trials should track and document menstrual changes as they do other possible side effects. Like the fevers reported after the vaccines, a transient change in one's period may not be bad for your overall health or have any lasting effects, but it's still informative.  An unexpected side effect like an unusually heavy period can prompt fear and undermine the public's trust in the vaccines. This is particularly important now, when ending the pandemic requires widespread acceptance of coronavirus vaccination.  Many people with regular periods use their monthly bleeds as a signpost of their overall health. Changes to their normal cycle can seem especially worrying in the wake of false rumors about the shots causing infertility, as well as news of rare blood clots possibly linked to the Johnson & Johnson vaccine.  There are many reasons vaccination could alter menstruation. As many people learn in sex education class or just before puberty, the menstrual cycle is an exquisitely timed series of hormones, including estrogen and progesterone, spiking and falling in preparation for a potential pregnancy.  Every month the lining of the uterus thickens, driven by a steady increase in estrogen, so that a fertilized egg can implant. If there is no conception, levels of progesterone plummet, causing most of the uterine layer to slough off, causing the bleeding.  But periods also involve the immune system. The thickening and thinning of the uterine lining are facilitated by different teams of immune cells and signals moving in and out of the reproductive tract; one wave helps to build, others help to dismantle. The process of shedding this lining during menstruation is in part an inflammatory response, which is why women often experience cramping and pain during this stage.  Since the cycle is supported by the immune system at every turn, it is possible that the vaccines, which are designed to ignite an immune response, temporarily change the normal course of events. For example, an activated immune system might interfere with the usual balance of immune cells and molecules in the uterus. These types of disturbances have been found in studies to contribute to changes in periods, including heavy menstrual flows.  But no one can say whether this may explain potential postvaccine disruptions to the menstrual cycle. To find out, we would need a controlled study with a placebo group. Clinical trials, including those for vaccines, typically omit the tracking of menstrual cycles, so we lack the evidence required to put these reports in context. (It should be noted that few mammals menstruate, which makes the subject harder to study in animals.)  ''Menstruation is something we don't know enough about,'' said Dr. Hugh Taylor, chair of the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at Yale School of Medicine. ''It's an important indicator of a person's health, like any other bodily function.''  For much of modern medical history, women were not included in medical trials because of their periods or because they might be pregnant. Investigators worried that fluctuating hormones would add too many variables, confounding their studies. In essence, they thought that the female body would ruin the research. In 1993, a federal law mandated the inclusion of women in government-funded trials because, as activists pointed out, too little was known about how new drugs and treatments affected women's health.  Even today, menstruation research tends to focus on fertility or contraception. Otherwise, periods have been considered an inconvenience. Researchers now routinely include women in clinical trials, but they often neglect to ask about menstrual cycles unless that's the focus of the study.  Rather than treat menstrual cycles as unimportant or too complicated, researchers should view tracking periods in future studies as a potential opportunity. Such work could help us to better understand the ways in which women respond differently to many diseases, treatments and interventions, not just the ones surrounding Covid-19. It could also inform our approach to the management of long-overlooked conditions known to be affected by the menstrual cycle, such as endometriosis.  For now, scientists are still in the dark about so much of female health. But a conversation has begun, thanks to women openly sharing their concerns. Let's take menstruation more seriously.  Alice Lu-Culligan (@aliceluculligan) is an M.D.-Ph.D. student at Yale School of Medicine, where she studies the immunobiology of pregnancy and fetal development. Randi Hutter Epstein (@randihepstein) is the writer in residence at Yale School of Medicine and the author of ''Aroused: The History of Hormones and How They Control Just About Everything.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Franziska Barczyk FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002z "
344		"   LETTER  Nuclear Plant Shutdown  207 words 22 April 2021   24     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  Re ''Nuclear Plant's Shutdown Means More Fossil Fuel in New York'' (news article, April 13):  New York State is making good on its promise to replace the aging, unsafe Indian Point nuclear plant with clean energy. Gains in energy efficiency and renewable power over the last decade already exceed the plant's total annual output, with much more to come.  We can expect year-to-year changes given fluctuations in energy demand and prices. But the overall trend in New York is clear: Clean energy is here to stay, and emissions reductions are on track to reach the state's ambitious climate goals.  Closing this dangerous plant is overdue. Over the years Indian Point has experienced reactor structure problems with the potential for structural failure, as well as leaks, fires and unplanned shutdowns.  For the 20 million people who live within 50 miles of it, Indian Point's long-planned closure ends a risky chapter.  Paul Gallay  Kit Kennedy  Mr. Gallay is president of Riverkeeper and Ms. Kennedy is senior director, climate and clean energy program, at the Natural Resources Defense Council.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Justin Lane/European Pressphoto Agency FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00038 "
345		"    Pentagon Asks for a Carrier to Shield Its Afghan Exit  By Helene Cooper, Eric Schmitt and Thomas Gibbons-Neff  1,116 words 22 April 2021   22     Military officials said the request was headed to the desk of Defense Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III, who is expected to decide soon.  WASHINGTON -- Military commanders are seeking to deploy an aircraft carrier specifically to help protect NATO troops in Afghanistan as they withdraw, the clearest sign yet that the Pentagon is preparing for a fight as it closes the books on America's longest war.  But the deployment -- likely to fall on either the overstretched Eisenhower or the Theodore Roosevelt, the carrier at the center of a coronavirus crisis last year -- will mean an additional load on the Navy's exhausted warships and crews, after a rash of extended deployments over the past few years.  The request, from Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., the head of Central Command, is en route to the desk of Defense Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III, military officials said. Mr. Austin is expected to decide soon.  The appeal is part of a withdrawal that the Pentagon describes as a ''military retrograde operation.'' Such movements often require -- as they do now -- sending additional troops and equipment to make sure departing forces can leave safely.  ''It's not over yet,'' Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters aboard his airplane last week, just after President Biden announced the Afghanistan withdrawal. ''We have a lot of work ahead of us to make sure we get out in a good and orderly fashion, protect the force and continue defending America.''  The Pentagon is concerned that the exit could draw fire from Taliban fighters hoping to put a final punctuation on what the militant group is presenting as a humiliating American defeat. Biden administration officials have sounded a tough line about retaliation if the Taliban mounts any attacks on retreating troops. But the insurgent group's intentions are unclear while its leadership meets in Pakistan to decide its next step.  To back up their warning, Defense Department officials say they will need fighter squadrons operating from carriers in the region and a slew of other warplanes, operating around the clock, to give cover to troops as they depart Afghanistan. Flights from carriers in the Persian Gulf are costly, and take repeated refueling trips just for the aircraft to stay over Afghanistan for a relatively short period.  ''We're going to protect the force,'' General Milley said. ''We have a change of mission. Our mission is to conduct a retrograde while protecting the force, and that's exactly what we're going to do.''  General McKenzie's request, military officials said, asks for 24-hour support from a carrier, with its attendant fighter squadrons, and is being viewed as a specific reference to the Eisenhower, which left its home port in Virginia in February and headed to the Mediterranean Sea. There, it took part in exercises with Italian and Moroccan naval forces. The Eisenhower is now in the Arabian Sea.  Col. Dave Butler, a spokesman for General Milley, declined to comment on the carrier request. Capt. Bill Urban, a spokesman for Central Command, also declined to comment. The Pentagon press secretary, John F. Kirby, said on Wednesday that Mr. Austin ''has made clear that we will execute the drawdown in Afghanistan in a safe, orderly and deliberate manner, and that we will do everything possible to protect our troops in the process.''  He, too, declined to discuss the request, saying that ''for operational security reasons, we will also not preview specific force protection measures being planned.''  Current and former senior Navy officials said immediate military missions may demand that warships' deployments be extended. But when this repeatedly happens, the long-term health and readiness of the fleet can erode, jeopardizing the Navy's ability to meet future missions.  ''We have these national assets like aircraft carriers to be available in times of crisis, especially when they're needed to protect the lives of troops on the ground,'' Vice Adm. Kevin Donegan, a retired Fifth Fleet commander, said in an interview. ''But you don't want this to be a routine thing, and that's what's happened in the past.''  Aboard the Eisenhower, some sailors were already worried about their deployments being extended, particularly if the carrier ends up providing air operations throughout the American withdrawal from Afghanistan, which Mr. Biden said must be completed by Sept. 11.  A Defense Department official said this week that it remained an open question whether American troops would have to fight their way out of Afghanistan or whether the withdrawal would be peaceful. He spoke on the condition of anonymity to speak publicly about the matter.  In recent years, aircraft carriers, which act as sovereign American territory at sea, have increasingly been used for flexing military power against adversaries.  For example, in January, the Pentagon reversed itself and ordered the aircraft carrier Nimitz to remain in the Middle East because of Iranian threats against President Donald J. Trump and other American officials, just three days after ordering the warship home as a signal to de-escalate rising tensions with Tehran.  The acting secretary of defense at the time, Christopher C. Miller, abruptly reversed his previous order to redeploy the Nimitz, which he had done over the objections of his top military advisers. The military had for weeks been engaged in a show-of-force strategy to deter Iran from attacking American personnel in the Persian Gulf.  In the end, the nuclear-powered warship did not return home until late February, some 10 months after it departed its home port in Bremerton, Wash. The sailors, pilots and crew aboard had witnessed an unfolding pandemic, a contested presidential election, a riot at the Capitol, and civil protests around the death of George Floyd, all while at sea.  Now, lawmakers are raising questions about the extended carrier deployments in recent years. In a letter this month to Mr. Austin and the deputy defense secretary, Kathleen Hicks, members of the House Armed Services Committee cited the ''need for increased prudence and scrutiny'' when it comes to requests for deployments. The lawmakers spoke of services ''scrambling at a time when they need to rebuild the health of the force.''  ''At this rate, the desire to solve every immediate problem regardless of its strategic prioritization, may hollow the force for the next generation,'' the letter said.  Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt reported from Washington, and Thomas Gibbons-Neff from Kabul, Afghanistan.  The U.S.S. Dwight D. Eisenhower may be deployed to support NATO troops leaving Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIC EDINGER/U.S. NAVY, VIA REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003l "
346		"    Museums Confront A Legacy of Slavery  By Jennifer Schuessler  1,658 words 22 April 2021   1     As one museum has pledged to return skulls held in an infamous collection, others, including the Smithsonian, are reckoning with their own holdings of African-American remains.  The Morton Cranial Collection, assembled by the 19th-century physician and anatomist Samuel George Morton, is one of the more complicated holdings of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.  Consisting of some 1,300 skulls gathered around the world, it provided the foundation for Morton's influential racist theories of differences in intelligence among races, which helped establish the now-discredited ''race science'' that contributed to 20th century eugenics. In recent years, part of the collection was prominently displayed in a museum classroom, a ghoulish object lesson in an infamous chapter of scientific history.  Last summer, after student activists highlighted the fact that some 50 skulls had come from enslaved Africans in Cuba, the museum moved the displayed skulls into storage with the rest of the collection. And last week, shortly after the release of outside research indicating roughly 14 other skulls had come from Black Philadelphians taken from pauper's graves, the museum announced that the entire collection would be opened up for potential ''repatriation or reburial of ancestors,'' as a step toward ''atonement and repair'' for past racist and colonialist practices.  The announcement was the latest development in a highly charged conversation about African-American remains in museum collections, especially those of the enslaved. In January, the president of Harvard University issued a letter to alumni and affiliates acknowledging that the 22,000 human remains in its collections included 15 from people of African descent who may have been enslaved in the United States, and pledging to review its policies of ''ethical stewardship.''  And now, that conversation may be set to explode. In recent weeks, the Smithsonian Institution, whose National Museum of Natural History houses the nation's largest collection of human remains, has been debating a proposed statement on its own African-American remains.  Those discussions, according to portions of an internal summary obtained by The new_york_times, have involved people who have long prioritized repatriation efforts as well as those who take a more traditional view of the museum's mission to collect, preserve and study artifacts, and who view repatriations as potential losses to science.  In an interview last week, Lonnie G. Bunch III, the secretary of the Smithsonian, declined to characterize the deliberations but confirmed the museum was developing new guidance, which he said would be undergirded by a clear imperative: ''to honor and remember.''  ''Slavery is in many ways the last great unmentionable in American discourse,'' he said. ''Anything we can do to both help the public understand the impact of slavery, and find ways to honor the enslaved, is at the top of my list.''  Any new policy, Dr. Bunch said, would build on existing programs for Native American remains. It could involve not just the return of remains to direct descendants, but possibly to communities, or even reburial in a national African-American burial ground. And the museum, he said, would also strive to tell fuller stories of individuals whose remains stay in the collection.  ''It used to be that scholarship trumped community,'' he said. ''Now, it's about finding the right tension between community and scholarship.''  The quantity of enslaved and other African-American remains in museums may be modest compared with the estimated 500,000 Native American remains in U.S. collections, which were scooped up from burial grounds and 19th-century battlefields on what Samuel J. Redman, an associate professor of history at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, termed ''an industrial scale.''  But Dr. Redman, the author of ''Bone Rooms,'' a history of remains collecting by museums, said the moves by Harvard, Penn and especially the Smithsonian could represent a ''historical tipping point.''  ''It puts into shocking relief our need to address the problem of the historical exploitation of people of color in the collecting of their objects, their stories and their bodies,'' he said.  The complexities around African-American remains -- who might claim them? how do you determine enslaved status? -- are enormous. Even just counting them is a challenge. According to an internal Smithsonian survey that has not previously been made public, the 33,000 remains in its storerooms include those from roughly 1,700 African-Americans, including an estimated several hundred who were born before 1865, and so may have been enslaved.  Some remains come from archaeological excavations. But the majority are from individuals who died in state-funded institutions for the poor, whose unclaimed bodies ended up in anatomical collections that were later acquired by the Smithsonian.  In addition to the 1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, which requires museums to return remains to tribes or lineal descendants that request them, the Smithsonian allows remains from named individuals of any race to be claimed by descendants. While many African-American individuals in the anatomical collections are named, none have ever been reclaimed, according to the natural history museum.  Kirk Johnson, the museum's director, said that the anatomical collections, while disproportionately gathered from the poor and marginalized, included a cross-section of society in terms of age, sex, race, ethnicity and cause of death, which had made them extremely useful for forensic anthropologists and other researchers.  But when it comes to African-American remains, a broader approach to repatriation -- including a more expansive notion of ''ancestor'' and ''descendant'' -- may be justified.  ''We've all had a season of becoming more enlightened about structural racism and anti-Black racism,'' he said. ''At the end of the day,'' he added, ''it's a matter of respect.''  Dr. Bunch, the Smithsonian's first Black secretary, said he hoped its actions would provide a model for institutions across the country. Some who have studied the history of the trade in Black bodies say such guidance is sorely needed.  ''It would be wonderful to have an African-American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act,'' said Daina Ramey Berry, a professor of history at the University of Texas and author of ''The Price for Their Pound of Flesh,'' a study of the commodification of enslaved bodies from birth to death.  ''We're finding evidence of enslaved bodies used at medical schools throughout the nation,'' she said. ''Some are still on display at universities. They need to be returned.''  Penn's Morton collection vividly embodies both the sordid side of the enterprise, and the way the meanings of collections change.  Morton, a successful doctor who was an active member of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, has sometimes been called the founder of American physical anthropology. He was a proponent of the theory of polygenesis, which held that some races were separate species, with separate origins. In books like the lavishly illustrated ''Crania Americana,'' from 1839, he drew on skull measurements to outline a proposed hierarchy of human intelligence, with Europeans on top and Africans in the United States at the bottom.  Morton's skull collection was said to be the first scholarly anatomical collection in the United States and, at the time, the largest. But after his death in 1851, it fell into obscurity, even as his racist ideas about differences in intelligence remained influential.  In 1966, the collection was relocated to the Penn Museum, from the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia. And it quickly became a useful tool for all sorts of scientific research -- including studies aimed at debunking the racist ideas it had helped create.  In a famous 1978 paper (later adapted for his book ''The Mismeasure of Man''), the paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould argued that Morton's racist assumptions had led him to make incorrect measurements -- thus turning Morton into a symbol not just of racist ideas, but of how bias can affect the seemingly objective procedures of science.  Gould's analysis of Morton's measurements has itself been hotly disputed. But in recent years, the appropriateness of possessing the skulls at all has been sharply questioned by campus and local activists, particularly after student researchers connected with the Penn & Slavery Project drew attention to the remains of the enslaved Cubans.  Christopher Woods, who became the museum's director earlier this month, said the new repatriation policy (which was recommended by a committee) would not change the collection's status as an active research source.  Although there has been no access to the actual skulls since last summer, legitimate researchers can examine 3-D scans of the entire collection, including those of 126 Native Americans that have already been repatriated.  ''The collection was put together for nefarious purpose in the 19th century, to reinforce white supremacist racial views, but there's still been good research done on that collection,'' Dr. Woods said.  When it comes to repatriation, he said, the moral imperative is clear, even if the specific course of action may not be. For the skulls of Black Philadelphians taken from pauper's graves (a major source for cadavers of all races at the time), he said the hope is they can be reburied in a local African-American cemetery.  The enslaved remains from Cuba, however, would require future research and possibly testing, as well as a search for an appropriate repatriation site, possibly in Cuba or West Africa, where most of the individuals were likely born.  The Black remains may have become a particularly urgent issue, he said. But repatriation requests for any skulls would be considered.  ''This is an ethical question,'' he said. ''We need to consider the wishes of the communities from whence these people came.''  The Penn Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, above, has 1,300 human skulls collected by Samuel George Morton, below, in the 19th century; he wrote of them in ''Crania Americana,'' left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY UNIVERSAL IMAGES GROUP/GETTY IMAGES; NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE; HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00030 "
347		"    A Promise on Refugees And a Surprise U-Turn Become a Test for Biden  By Michael D. Shear and Zolan Kanno-Youngs  2,071 words 22 April 2021   19     What had been an easy promise on the campaign trail -- to reverse what Democrats called President Donald J. Trump's ''racist'' limits on accepting refugees -- has become a test of what is truly important to President Biden.  WASHINGTON -- Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken was in the Oval Office, pleading with President Biden.  In the meeting, on March 3, Mr. Blinken implored the president to end Trump-era restrictions on immigration and to allow tens of thousands of desperate refugees fleeing war, poverty and natural disasters into the United States, according to several people familiar with the exchange.  But Mr. Biden, already under intense political pressure because of the surge of migrant children at the border with Mexico, was unmoved. The attitude of the president during the meeting, according to one person to whom the conversation was later described, was, essentially: Why are you bothering me with this?  What had been an easy promise on the campaign trail -- to reverse what Democrats called President Donald J. Trump's ''racist'' limits on accepting refugees -- has become a test of what is truly important to the new occupant of the White House, according to an account of his decision making from more than a dozen Biden administration officials, refugee resettlement officials and others.  Mr. Biden was eager for the praise that would come from vastly increasing Mr. Trump's record-low limit, people familiar with his thinking said, and he decided to increase the cap even earlier than the usual start of the fiscal year, Oct. 1.  But only weeks into Mr. Biden's presidency, immigration and the border had already become major distractions from his efforts to defeat the coronavirus pandemic and to persuade Congress to invest trillions of dollars into the economy -- issues championed by aides like Ron Klain, the White House chief of staff, as more central to his presidency.  Now, a decision to raise the refugee limit to 62,500 -- as Mr. Biden had promised only weeks earlier to members of Congress -- would invite from Republicans new attacks of hypocrisy and open borders even as the president was calling for bipartisanship. It was terrible timing, he told officials, especially with federal agencies already struggling to manage the highest number of migrant children and teenagers at the border in more than a decade.  The exchange on March 3 took place shortly after Mr. Biden had dispatched Mr. Blinken and two other cabinet secretaries to formally tell Congress that he would increase refugee admissions during the next six months to 62,500 people from the annual 15,000-person limit set by Mr. Trump.  Instead, the president undercut his emissaries and left hundreds of refugees in limbo for weeks.  For the next month and a half, Mr. Biden's aides stalled, repeatedly telling reporters and refugee advocacy groups that the president still intended to follow through. But the delay had real-world consequences: Flights were canceled for more than 700 refugees who had already been thoroughly screened and issued tickets to travel to the United States.  Under pressure to let them in, members of Mr. Biden's staff came up with a compromise they hoped would satisfy the president and resettlement agencies. They would keep the 15,000-refugee limit, but lift Trump-era restrictions that would allow more flights to resume. On Friday, White House officials informed reporters of the new policy.  The backlash was immediate.  Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, posted on Twitter: ''Say it ain't so, President Joe. This is unacceptable.''  Within hours, the president backtracked. The White House issued a statement saying Mr. Biden still intended to allow more refugees into the country and promising to reveal more details by May 15.  Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, blamed the episode on ''messaging'' mistakes. But for Mr. Biden, it was another example of his administration's struggle to make good on a promise to restore the United States' reputation as a sanctuary for the most vulnerable -- a pledge Democrats eagerly made during the presidential campaign to distance themselves from Mr. Trump. It was also an early lesson in what happens when a president builds up expectations and fails to follow through.  The Commitment  In a statement on World Refugee Day last summer, Mr. Biden, then a candidate for president, made his support explicit.  ''I will increase the number of refugees we welcome into this country, setting an annual global refugee target of 125,000,'' he said, promising to ''further raise it over time commensurate with our responsibility.''  After winning the White House, his transition team set about making good on that pledge, debating the pros and cons in a series of meetings in December. With only six months left in the fiscal year, Mr. Biden's advisers recommended he could go beyond his campaign pledge.  Presidents normally raise refugee admissions at the end of the fiscal year. But Mr. Biden would allow up to 62,500 refugees to enter the United States before Oct. 1 by declaring the ''grave humanitarian concerns'' around the world an emergency.  The president made no mention of refugees in a flurry of immigration-related executive orders on his first day in office. But on Feb. 4, only two weeks later, he announced his plans with a flourish during a speech at the State Department.  ''It's going to take time to rebuild what has been so badly damaged, but that's precisely what we're going to do,'' Mr. Biden said. He did not mention the 62,500 number, but repeated his promise of 125,000 starting in October and added, ''I'm directing the State Department to consult with Congress about making a down payment on that commitment as soon as possible.''  On Feb. 12, the president delivered on the specific commitment to Congress, pledging to resettle 62,500 refugees fleeing war and persecution at home. Mr. Blinken delivered the message to lawmakers along with Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, and Norris Cochran, the acting health secretary at the time.  ''They went there and presented a really thoughtful plan, and we were so thrilled,'' said Mark J. Hetfield, the chief executive of HIAS, founded as Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, a resettlement agency. ''And then,'' Mr. Hetfield said, ''it just evaporated overnight.''  The Impact  The effect of the president's delay in Washington was felt throughout the world.  Resettlement agencies had already booked flights for hundreds of refugees.  Such immigrants must be identified as refugees by the United Nations or other organizations and clear several rounds of vetting that can take, on average, two years, according to the National Immigration Forum, an advocacy organization. Roughly 33,000 refugees have received such approval, and about 115,000 are in the pipeline to be resettled.  While the Department of Health and Human Services has scrambled to provide shelter to minors at the border, its role in assisting refugees overseas is limited mostly to providing financial support to families after they arrive in the United States. The Departments of State and Homeland Security play a more significant role in vetting refugees overseas.  Under Mr. Trump, who instituted bans on refugees and expanded vetting for those fleeing persecution, many had all but given up hope of reuniting with relatives in the United States.  The Biden administration intended to send a message after four years of immigration policies that walled off America to the most vulnerable.  In a quarterly meeting on Feb. 26 between the State Department and the resettlement agencies, Biden administration officials said an updated budget for refugees would be released as soon as the president signed the final declaration, according to people familiar with the matter. But Mr. Biden had yet to do that, and flights for refugees, officials warned, would soon be canceled.  As the weeks stretched into months, it became clear that Mr. Biden's presidency would not be the panacea some had thought.  ''To just give a refugee a ticket after they wait in a line and follow the rules and go through this intrusive process and then snatch that ticket from their hand because the president didn't sign a piece of paper?'' Mr. Hetfield said. ''That's unacceptable.''  The Denial  Inside the White House, the president had made his views clear, according to several people familiar with his objections to the idea of capping refugee admissions at 62,500. With crossings at the border rising, he did not intend to sign off on that number.  Ned Price, a spokesman for Mr. Blinken, said that ''it should come as no surprise that Secretary Blinken has had opportunities to discuss repairing and strengthening'' the refugee program with Mr. Biden. Officials familiar with the discussion said the two men, who are personally close, did not fight over the issue, but the president left no doubt where he stood.  Publicly, Ms. Psaki was delivering a very different message.  On April 1, she denied that the delay in signing the presidential determination was related to resources that were already being spent at the southwestern border.  ''No, no, it's not related to that,'' she said. ''No.''  And on April 8, Ms. Psaki was asked whether there was ''some complication to raising the refugee cap.'' She denied that there was.  ''No,'' she said. ''We remain committed to it.''  Members of Congress were concerned, too. Until Mr. Trump's assault on the refugee program, presidents of both parties had always signed the presidential determination within hours of delivering it to lawmakers, as the refugee statute requires.  But under Mr. Biden, the wait seemed endless.  The Reversal  Last Friday, that wait was finally over. But it was not what anyone outside the White House expected: Mr. Trump's cap would remain in place.  ''The admission of up to 15,000 refugees remains justified by humanitarian concerns and is otherwise in the national interest,'' Mr. Biden wrote in a presidential memo to the State Department. Once Mr. Trump's cap was filled, the memo said, the ceiling could be raised again ''as appropriate.''  Instead of making good on his promise to significantly expand refugee entry into the United States, Mr. Biden was sticking to the cap engineered by Stephen Miller, the architect of Mr. Trump's immigration policies.  ''This reflects Team Biden's awareness that the border flood will cause record midterm losses,'' Mr. Miller tweeted, adding that if it were still up to him, ''Refugee cap should be reduced to ZERO.''  The idea that Mr. Miller and Mr. Biden were in agreement about anything was anathema to most of the president's supporters, many of whom flew into a rage.  ''This cruel policy is no more acceptable now than it was during the Trump administration,'' said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut.  Within a few hours, officials in the White House knew they had a problem on their hands. In a statement at 4:36 p.m., Ms. Psaki asserted that the president's decision on refugees ''has been the subject of some confusion.''  While Ms. Psaki has insisted that Mr. Biden would most likely increase the number of allowed refugees again by May 15, a senior White House official cast doubt on the timeline. ''I don't think we're going to hit 15,000 imminently or anything like that,'' the official said. ''I don't think anyone can know exactly what the pace is going to be.''  By Friday evening, the White House was in full damage-control mode.  Jon Finer, the deputy national security adviser, held an emergency conference call with refugee advocates at 7:30 p.m., emphasizing that the administration would work to welcome in the refugees with haste.  ''I just hope the energy the Biden administration had during their first three weeks in office demonstrating leadership in the global refugee crisis gets back on track,'' Mr. Hetfield said. ''They lost so much momentum.''  Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York.  Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York.  Migrants in Tijuana, Mexico, last week waiting for the American authorities to let them begin the process of legally entering the U.S. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUILLERMO ARIAS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken pushed to lift a refugee cap. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEFANI REYNOLDS FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002x "
348		"    Climate Warrior Takes A Hit to His Reputation  By Ian Austen and Christopher Flavelle  1,453 words 22 April 2021   13     Canada is the only G7 nation whose greenhouse gas emissions have increased since the Paris Agreement. The main reason: its oil sands.  OTTAWA -- Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada will arrive for President Biden's climate summit on Thursday with an outsize reputation for being a warrior in the global fight against climate change.  But one facet of Canada's economy complicates his record: the country's insistence on expanding output from its oil sands.  Between Mr. Trudeau's election in 2015 and 2019, Canada's greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1 percent, despite decreases in other rich nations during the same period, according to government data released last week. In fact, Canada is the only Group of 7 country whose emissions have risen since the Paris climate agreement was signed six years ago.  Canadian officials insist that Mr. Trudeau's policies simply need more time to work. But environmentalists counter that Canada can't reduce emissions without reducing oil production from the sands.  As one of the world's largest oil reserves, the oil sands are also among the most polluting, given the amount of energy required to extract it. But it's unlikely that Mr. Trudeau would end production there.  The oil sands are integral to the economy of the western province of Alberta. If Mr. Trudeau or any other Canadian politician declared them obsolete, the political backlash would be overwhelming.  ''There's a disconnect, at least on the international stage, between Canada's reputation on climate and the reality of action on the ground,'' said Catherine Abreu, the executive director of Climate Action Network Canada, a coalition of about 100 labor, Indigenous, environmental and religious groups. ''We really have to stop selling ourselves that perhaps comforting, but dangerous, lie that there is room for the oil sands in the future.''  Tim McMillan, president and chief executive of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, which represents oil companies, said in a statement that average emissions per barrel of oil from the oil sands have decreased by 21 percent since 2009, and are projected to drop further.  ''The oil sands industry is taking emissions reduction seriously,'' Mr. McMillan said. ''Production growth can be compatible with emissions reductions.''  Few dispute Mr. Trudeau's commitment to stopping climate change. Canada increased its carbon price -- which provinces must adopt or have imposed by the federal government -- to 40 Canadian dollars a metric ton this month and it is scheduled to rise to 170 dollars by the end of the decade. The government has also moved forward on clean fuel standards, as well as limiting leaks of methane, a potent climate change gas, and other measures.  On Monday, Canada said it is on track for a 36 percent emissions reduction by 2030, compared with 2005 levels.  Mr. Trudeau's actions contrasted starkly with the United States under President Donald J. Trump, who dismissed climate change and reversed American policies to combat it.  Now Mr. Biden has made climate a central issue for his administration. At the summit, he is expected to announce that the United States will cut its greenhouse gas emissions by about half by 2030, compared with 2005 levels.  Mr. Trudeau is expected to announce a new reduction target for the same period, but few experts expect him to match Mr. Biden's cut.  The timing could leave Canada in a bind, according to Dale Beugin, vice president for research and analysis at the Canadian Institute for Climate Choices, a nonpartisan research group.  Mr. Trudeau's pledge to raise the carbon tax to 170 Canadian dollars, announced late last year, is already seen as ambitious, he said.  Canada will need to take additional measures, Mr. Beugin said, because Canada's carbon tax, combined with other existing policies, will be ''just barely'' enough for it to reach its current target. ''If they go bigger,'' he asked, ''what else are they going to do?''  If Canada lags too far behind the United States in reducing emissions, it could face repercussions, including the imposition of U.S. carbon tariffs on Canadian goods crossing the border, said Jake Schmidt of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental advocacy group.  ''It'll be quite obvious to the world who's really serious about climate change and who's taking half measures,'' he added.  Canada's environment minister, Jonathan Wilkinson, declined to reveal the country's new target in advance of the summit. But he cautioned against judging countries solely by the targets they present this week.  The United States, he said, is in a much better position to realistically propose big cuts in the near term, adding while the United States was encouraging the world to ignore climate change the past few years, Canada was plowing forward.  ''The United States perhaps has some things that it can learn from the experiences that we've had,'' he said.  Mr. Biden's climate agenda, Mr. Wilkinson argued, benefits from some low-hanging fruit: the large amount of electricity still produced by burning coal and other fossil fuels. The falling cost of renewable energy is already reducing the use of coal, pushing down U.S. emissions.  ''The United States, in some respects, has a pretty big tail wind with respect to the increasing phaseout of coal,'' he said.  Canada, by contrast, long ago largely cleaned up that sector. Today about 82 percent of its electricity comes from sources that do not emit carbon, the largest one being hydroelectric dams. In 2019, emissions from Canada's electricity generation fell below oil sands emissions for the first time.  But what coal-fired power is to the United States' emissions profile, some say, the oil sands are to Canada's.  Mr. Wilkinson has acknowledged that Canada will need to make significant cuts to oil sands emissions, though it's not entirely clear how that can be done while maintaining or even increasing oil exports, largely to the United States. He said that the United States will also need to tackle emissions from its own oil and gas industry, which is far larger than Canada's.  Oil sands producers regularly highlight their efforts to reduce the number of emissions per barrel. But Andrew Leach, an energy and environment economist at the University of Alberta, said that the recent emissions improvements in the oil sands have mainly come from projects that were large carbon emitters but not the largest operations.  While there have been some reductions of oil sands emissions per barrel, the steady increase in production has more than wiped out those gains.  No projects to date have used hydrogen to replace the vast amounts of natural gas used to separate the oil-bearing bitumen from rock and sand and then to process it. And a heavily promoted technology to capture carbon dioxide and store it underground is only being used at a single plant that turns bitumen into crude oil.  ''We still have a huge challenge,'' said Professor Leach. ''You see people almost declaring victory before the first battle's been fought.''  In its budget this week, Mr. Trudeau's government set aside 2 billion Canadian dollars to offer Canadian industries a tax credit for carbon capture, but its details still need to be worked out.  The offer comes a month after Jason Kenney, the Conservative premier of Alberta, called on Mr. Trudeau's government to provide 30 billion Canadian dollars for the development of carbon capture technologies.  While a step of that magnitude might be popular in Alberta, where Mr. Trudeau attracts little support, it could be seen as an oil industry subsidy and alienate voters elsewhere in country who support the Liberals, carbon taxes and other climate measures.  Many environmentalists in Canada say that rather than subsidize the energy industry, Mr. Trudeau's government should openly acknowledge that the oil sands are a declining industry and start focusing on managing that decline and investing in new job opportunities for its thousands of workers.  ''Canada's oil gas sector produces some of the dirtiest and most expensive fossil fuels in the world,'' said Ms. Abreu of Climate Action Network Canada. ''It's really unrealistic for governments in this country to keep telling the public that we can expect that industry to continue indefinitely.''  Christopher Flavelle reported from Washington. Brad Plumer contributed reporting from Washington.  Christopher Flavelle reported from Washington. Brad Plumer contributed reporting from Washington.  Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada met with Greta Thunberg, the Swedish climate activist, in 2019. Top, an iceberg in Nunavut, where there is evidence that the glaciers are shrinking. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREJ IVANOV/REUTERS; SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00036 "
349		"   UNBUTTONED  Where Did Street Style Start Out? In Rags.  By Vanessa Friedman  1,399 words 22 April 2021   4     This is the origin story most people have never heard.  One of the most influential magazines most people have never heard of existed for the blink of a hair-covered eye in the Bay Area from 1970 to 1971.  The brainchild of a pair of editorial refugees from glossy-land and a Rolling Stone photographer, Rags was the first publication to identify street style as a discrete fashion sector and call out the establishment for trying to manufacture trends. You can draw a direct line from its birth to the work of Bill Cunningham (Rags had an ''On the Street'' photo section eight years before ''On the Street'' appeared in The new_york_times) and such Instagram sensations as The Sartorialist and Tommy Ton.  Barbara Kruger was an art director before her work was shown at MoMA; R. Crumb did illustrations for the prototype before he created Fritz the Cat. Rags covered vintage fashion before Christie's started its auctions, D.I.Y. fashion before D.I.Y. became a thing, and eco-fashion before it became upcycling.  And it predicted the splintering of the style dictatorship created by the collusion of high-fashion brands, haute department stores and magazines with names like Vogue, amid the rise of the host of subcultures and style tribes that exist today.  I know this not because I actually knew anything about Rags before this month, but because the Waverly Press has reissued all 13 issues in a limited-edition boxed set, along with special photographs, artifacts from the archives, and a paperback book featuring ''The Best of Rags.''  For anyone wondering about how we got to here -- a world where social media feeds are full of influencers who once upon a time were only people peacocking outside fashion shows and music festivals; a world where street wear refers to an actual vibrant, growing market sector, not just stuff you wear on the street -- this is part of the answer.  This is why, when you mention the name Rags, despite the fact that most people give you a blank look, die-hard magazine folks (the kind of people who can go on and on about typefaces and layouts and haunt flea markets for obscure issues), start figuratively bouncing on their toes.  ''Was/is inspiring,'' texted Carla Sozzani, the founder of 10 Corso Como and former editor of Italian Elle.  ''Soooo epic,'' emailed Jefferson Hack, a founder of Dazed Media.  ''Revolutionary,'' said Stefano Tonchi, the global chief creative officer of L'Officiel, who said he had discovered the magazine while sifting through stands at the Rose Bowl market in Los Angeles, and bought the entire publication run.  Magazines occupy a funny place in our mental library. Not quite as ephemeral as newspapers (even the ones on newsprint) but not as forever as books, they arrive like monthly or weekly dispatches from friends, home to snippets of great writing and photography and illustration that sit somewhere at the nexus of reality and creativity because they are really about being creative with reality. They can be hard to throw away, but then they pile up and become hard to keep.  And they are increasingly discussed as an endangered species, at least in print -- blink and it seems as if another publication has gone all-digital. Self, Glamour, Seventeen, Teen Vogue, Redbook, Vogue and other monthlies are in endless identity crises: No longer the conduit of what readers need to know nor fast-twitch enough to satisfy the digital maw, they are losing their reason for being.  But what a scan through the short but striking life of Rags makes clear is that magazines also serve to capture a moment not just in time, but also in shifting identity -- are, in fact, perhaps better conceived to capture that elusive thing, the shift itself, than any other medium.  Founded by Baron Wolman (the chief photographer for Rolling Stone from 1967 to 1970, who financed Rags in part by selling his Rolling Stone stock), along with Mary Peacock (a former Harper's Bazaar editor, and later fashion editor of The Village Voice) and Daphne Davis, Rags was a tabloid-size, bound newsprint publication that was positioned as the anti-Vogue.  It was born, like Rolling Stone, from the counterculture of the late 1960s and was created to chronicle and reflect its evolution -- and celebrate it -- smashing up politics and dress and the politics of dress with a sly sense of fun. Rags believed individual style was a serious business, but it never took it terribly seriously. To wit: the name.  As Mr. Wolman said in an interview with The new_york_times not long after the magazine began: ''Fashion for years has been trying to tell us to conform to its idea of what is beautiful -- to become the Beautiful People. Now, individual creativity is what is beautiful.'' Sound familiar?  Indeed, most of the content would not seem out of place today.  Feature subjects included a host of Warhol superstars as well as an analysis of Janis Joplin's style and an interview with funk singer Betty Davis; fashion shoots involved tattoos, cowboys and the clergy. Rags road-tested nine brands of jeans by running over them with a VW Beetle, freezing them and bleaching them; it taught readers how to make a vest made from beer can pull tabs (it looked very Paco Rabanne). But perhaps its most famous issue was No. 5: ''Fashion Fascism.''  This involved a deconstruction of attempts by Big Fashion (like Big Tobacco) to replace the miniskirt with the midi-skirt in order to get consumers buying again (and buying clothes that involved more fabric). This included offering saleswomen steep discounts on midi-skirts so that they'd model what they pushed, and enlisting glossy magazines and Women's Wear Daily in the cause. It also included interviewing Marshal McLuhan on the meaning of the miniskirt.  Rags went out of business in a year, running out of money just as Levi's was set to make a major ad buy. ''One month too late!'' Mr. Wolman said in an interview with Dazed.  And it might have stayed one of the many boundary-publishing magazines that disappeared into the slag heap of pop culture history until Dagon James, the founder and publisher of the Waverly Press, and Mr. Wolman (with whom he had created a number of photography books, including ''Woodstock'' in 2014 and ''Jimi Hendrix'' in 2018) began talking back in 2009 when the 40th anniversary of the magazine was looming. Not so much because of the milestone, Mr. James said, but because it has become clear that many of the currents that Rags had chronicled were not passing fads but actual cultural pivots.  It was 10 years later that they got serious about the project. Then, in the midst of the planning, Mr. Wolman learned he had A.L.S., also known as Lou Gehrig's disease; he died in November, before the book was finished. For Mr. James, seeing the project through became both a calling and a gift.  Coincidentally, around the same time that the Rags reissues became available, a new magazine was introduced. (You can't fault the optimism of the print world, even in the face of its own demise.)  Called Perfect, and founded by the superstylist Katie Grand, she of Prada and Marc Jacobs fame, the magazine is actually more like a monument: an eight-pound, hard-backed book with hundreds of glossy pages of ads and fashion shoots that practically dares you to throw it out or recycle it. In its weight and anti-disposability it's the antithesis of everything Rags stood for, yet it also celebrates, in the words of Mr. Wolman, ''individual creativity.''  And looking at the two of them together, it's hard not to think that they contain a joint lesson. Great magazines don't disappear. They just become ... coffee-table books.  Above from left: the October 1970 issue of Rags; a page from the second issue; a feature that tested jeans by running over them with a VW Beetle; and the singer Betty Davis.; Center, from left, the editor Mary Peacock, the designer Betsey Johnson and the editor Blair Sabol in the first issue of Rags. Above, Baron Wolman, the magazine's founder. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BARON WOLMAN)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0003a "
350		"    Black Troops Deserve Better  By Theodore R. Johnson  1,269 words 22 April 2021   25     For centuries, Black American troops have not fully enjoyed the freedom they are sworn to defend.  I can't remember the exact moment it occurred, but at some point early in my 20-year career in the U.S. Navy, I picked up a survival tactic. It wasn't a novel technique for handling being stranded at sea or navigating out of a dense jungle in enemy territory; it was how to survive an encounter with American law enforcement.  The maneuver was quite simple: Each time I was pulled over by police officers and they asked for my license and registration, the first thing I gave them was my military ID.  It was no guarantee that the stop would go smoothly, but when you're a Black man and those swirling blue lights cast a shadow of yourself in the car, it's wise to stack the odds in your favor as much as possible. The military identification card was a communiqué that I was neither a threat to the officers nor to the society they police. And I have no doubt that the ID card with my uniformed picture and rank on it encouraged nearly all the policemen who stopped me to extend a little more grace.  But watching the video of Army Second Lt. Caron Nazario being pulled over, held at gunpoint, pepper-sprayed, and handcuffed -- all while in his military uniform -- was a stark reminder that not even a willingness to die for the country can protect you from it.  Seeing chemicals temporarily take Lieutenant Nazario's sight, tears from pepper spray rolling down his face, I was reminded of the blinding of Isaac Woodard, a World War II soldier who was in uniform and on a bus ride home when he was beaten by police at a stop in South Carolina until his eyes permanently failed.  The ordeal also brought to mind World War I Army Pvt. Charles Lewis, who showed police his enlistment papers when they demanded to search his baggage and was jailed for assault and resisting arrest after arguing with officers about his innocence. That night, 10 days before Christmas, Lewis was lynched by a mob in Hickman, Ky., and the next day, the town found him hanging from a branch in his olive-green Army uniform.  For longer than there's been a United States, two things have been true: Black Americans have served in all their country's wars, and racism has prevented them from tasting the fullness of the very freedom many of them died fighting for. In the earliest conflicts, including the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812, Black people escaped enslavement to serve in the military, only to be returned to bondage once the conflicts subsided. The benefits made available to service members and veterans throughout the military's history, including the early 20th century's transformational G.I. Bill, were largely withheld from Black Americans who served.  And our enemies knew it. On battlefields from World War I to the Vietnam War, Black troops were peppered with leaflets from enemy forces essentially asking, ''Why are you over here fighting us when America is attacking your people at home?'' Adversary nations didn't have to look far for such material; Black Americans have been asking the United States variants of this question for centuries. And we heard it again from Lieutenant Nazario, who asked while being assaulted, ''I'm serving this country, and this is how I'm treated?''  The military service of Black Americans has long been part of a deliberate strategy of superlative citizenship, a ''twice as good'' for civic life and a means of making a direct claim on all the rights and privileges of being an American by taking on one of its important responsibilities. Superlative citizenship draws its power from challenging a national hypocrisy, demonstrating that the country is more wedded to the appearance of holding certain truths as self-evident than to a steadfast commitment to ensure every citizen enjoys the rights that spring from them.  Superlative citizenship is also an explicit counterargument to the racist tropes that have been used to justify why Black people have always experienced a lesser version of America than many others. It asks a stubborn nation how it's possible that a people historically deemed biologically, intellectually, culturally and socially inferior can be exemplars of the American spirit, performing the excellencies of citizenship even though the nation has not delivered on its promises.  It's because of the prestige military service confers that few things challenge America's conception of itself like a Black American in a military uniform. The differing societal statuses attached to race and to service in the armed forces create tension between Blackness and the uniform -- the former long perceived as incompatible with being a real American and the latter suggesting the fullest embodiment of it.  Of course, as body camera footage of Lieutenant Nazario's detainment clearly demonstrates, superlative citizenship exhibited by Black Americans is insufficient to avoid surveillance and violence. This plays out in many ways, large and small, from lethal confrontations to life's smaller but consequential indignities. While in uniform, I was trailed for more than a half-hour by a department store's loss prevention employee in the mall across the street from the Pentagon, as if I'd risk my career or my freedom for a polo shirt on clearance. And when telling my graduate class about seeking some sense of safety during a traffic stop by showing my military ID, one of my active-duty Army students told me how he'd tried that once and was quickly told, ''That's not going to help you, boy.''  And yet, though insufficient to stop racial discrimination, the violation of a Black American in uniform can be instrumental. When President Harry Truman learned of Mr. Woodard's blinding and the violence exacted on other Black veterans, it led him to sign the historic executive order desegregating the military in 1948. Would the nation care about the video of Lieutenant Nazario, causing a cop with poor judgment to be removed from the force, if he hadn't been a military officer in uniform? Would Lieutenant Nazario even be here to tell his story, or would he have shared the fate of Philando Castile, George Floyd, Daunte Wright and Eric Garner, whom Lieutenant Nazario called his uncle?  Of course, the uniform comes off; race doesn't. This is why before letting Lieutenant Nazario go after not charging him with anything, according to the lawsuit he filed, the policemen who violently accosted him threatened his career if he spoke out about the stop. The implication was clear: Once the uniform is off and the military ID taken away, he is just another Black dude in America -- a sober reminder that to too many people, the uniform matters more than the Black life it clothes.  Theodore R. Johnson (@DrTedJ), a retired Navy commander and a senior fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice, is the author of the forthcoming book ''When the Stars Begin to Fall: Overcoming Racism and Renewing the Promise of America.''  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY AFRO AMERICAN NEWSPAPERS/GADO/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002y "
351		"   POLITICAL MEMO  Growing Threat to American Democracy: Us vs. Them  By Nate Cohn  2,048 words 22 April 2021   14     The country is increasingly split into camps that don't just disagree on policy and politics -- they see the other as alien, immoral, a threat. Such political sectarianism is now on the march.  American democracy faces many challenges: New limits on voting rights. The corrosive effect of misinformation. The rise of domestic terrorism. Foreign interference in elections. Efforts to subvert the peaceful transition of power. And making matters worse on all of these issues is a fundamental truth: The two political parties see the other as an enemy.  It's an outlook that makes compromise impossible and encourages elected officials to violate norms in pursuit of an agenda or an electoral victory. It turns debates over changing voting laws into existential showdowns. And it undermines the willingness of the loser to accept defeat -- an essential requirement of a democracy.  This threat to democracy has a name: sectarianism. It's not a term usually used in discussions about American politics. It's better known in the context of religious sectarianism -- like the hostility between Sunnis and Shia in Iraq. Yet a growing number of eminent political scientists contend that political sectarianism is on the rise in America.  That contention helps make sense of a lot of what's been going on in American politics in recent years, including Donald J. Trump's successful presidential bid, President Biden's tortured effort to reconcile his inaugural call for ''unity'' with his partisan legislative agenda, and the plan by far-right House members to create a congressional group that would push some views associated with white supremacy. Most of all, it re-centers the threat to American democracy on the dangers of a hostile and divided citizenry.  In recent years, many analysts and commentators have told a now-familiar story of how democracies die at the hands of authoritarianism: A demagogic populist exploits dissatisfaction with the prevailing liberal order, wins power through legitimate means, and usurps constitutional power to cement his or her own rule. It's the story of Putin's Russia, Chavez's Venezuela and even Hitler's Germany.  Sectarianism, in turn, instantly evokes an additional set of very different cautionary tales: Ireland, the Middle East and South Asia, regions where religious sectarianism led to dysfunctional government, violence, insurgency, civil war and even disunion or partition.  These aren't always stories of authoritarian takeover, though sectarianism can yield that outcome as well. As often, it's the story of a minority that can't accept being ruled by its enemy.  In many ways, that's the story playing out in America today.  Whether religious or political, sectarianism is about two hostile identity groups who not only clash over policy and ideology, but see the other side as alien and immoral. It's the antagonistic feelings between the groups, more than differences over ideas, that drive sectarian conflict.  Any casual observer of American politics would agree that there's plenty of hostility between Democrats and Republicans. Many don't just disagree, they dislike each other. They hold discriminatory attitudes in job hiring as they do on the Implicit Association Test. They tell pollsters they wouldn't want their child to marry an opposing partisan. In a paper published in Science in October by 16 prominent political scientists, the authors argue that by some measures the hatred between the two parties ''exceeds longstanding antipathies around race and religion.''  More than half of Republicans and more than 40 percent of Democrats tend to think of the other party as ''enemies,'' rather than ''political opponents,'' according to a CBS News poll conducted in January. A majority of Americans said that other Americans were the greatest threat to America.  On one level, partisan animosity just reflects the persistent differences between the two parties over policy issues. Over the past two decades, they have fought bruising battles over the Iraq war, gun rights, health care, taxes and more. Perhaps hard feelings wouldn't necessarily be sectarian in nature.  But the two parties have not only become more ideologically polarized -- they have simultaneously sorted along racial, religious, educational, generational and geographic lines. Partisanship has become a ''mega-identity,'' in the words of the political scientist Lilliana Mason, representing both a division over policy and a broader clash between white, Christian conservatives and a liberal, multiracial, secular elite.  And as mass sectarianism has grown in America, some of the loudest partisan voices in Congress or on Fox News, Twitter, MSNBC and other platforms have determined that it's in their interest to lean into cultural warfare and inflammatory rhetoric to energize their side against the other.  The conservative outrage over the purported canceling of Dr. Seuss is a telling marker of how intergroup conflict has supplanted old-fashioned policy debate. Culture war politics used to be synonymous with a fight over ''social issues,'' like abortion or gun policy, where government played a central role. The Dr. Seuss controversy had no policy implications. What was at stake was the security of one sect, which saw itself as under attack by the other. It's the kind of issue that would arouse passions in an era of sectarianism.  A Morning Consult/Politico poll conducted in March found that Republicans had heard more about the Dr. Seuss issue than they had heard about the $1.9 trillion stimulus package. A decade earlier, a far smaller stimulus package helped launch the Tea Party movement.  The Dr. Seuss episode is hardly the only example of Republicans de-emphasizing policy goals in favor of stoking sectarianism. Last month, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, penned an op-ed in support of unionization at Amazon as retribution for the Seattle company's cultural liberalism. At its 2020 national convention, the Republican Party didn't even update its policy platform.  And perhaps most significant, Republicans made the choice in 2016 to abandon laissez-faire economics and neoconservative foreign policy and embrace sectarianism all at once and in one package: Donald J. Trump. The G.O.P. primaries that year were a referendum on whether it was easier to appeal to conservatives with conservative policy or by stoking sectarian animosity. Sectarianism won.  Sectarianism has been so powerful among Republicans in part because they believe they're at risk of being consigned to minority status. The party has lost the popular vote in seven of the last eight presidential elections, and conservatives fear that demographic changes promise to further erode their support. And while defeat is part of the game in democracy, it is a lot harder to accept in a sectarian society.  It is not easy to accept being ruled by a hostile, alien rival. It can make ''political losses feel like existential threats,'' as the authors of the study published in Science put it.  As a result, the minority often poses a challenge to democracy in a sectarian society. It's the minority who bears the costs, whether material or psychological, of accepting majority rule in a democracy. In the extreme, rule by a hostile, alien group might not feel much different than being subjugated by another nation.  Democracies in sectarian societies often create institutional arrangements to protect the minority, like minority or group rights, power-sharing agreements, devolution or home rule. Otherwise, the most alienated segments of the minority might resort to violence and insurgency in hopes of achieving independence.  Republicans are not consigned to permanent minority status like the typical sectarian minority, of course. The Irish had no chance to become the majority in the United Kingdom. Neither did the Muslims of the British Raj or the Sunnis in Iraq today. Democrats just went from the minority to the majority in all three branches of elected government in four years; Republicans could do the same.  But changes in the racial and cultural makeup of the country leave conservatives feeling far more vulnerable than Republican electoral competitiveness alone would suggest. Demographic projections suggest that non-Hispanic whites will become a minority sometime in the middle of the century. People with a four-year college degree could become a majority of voters even sooner. Religiosity is declining.  The sense that the country is changing heightens Republican concerns. In recent days, the Fox News host Tucker Carlson embraced the conspiracy theory that the Democratic Party was ''trying to replace the current electorate'' with new voters from ''the third world.'' Far-right extremists in the House are looking to create an ''America First Caucus'' that calls for ''common respect for uniquely Anglo-Saxon political traditions'' and an infrastructure that ''befits the progeny of European architecture.''  It is not easy to pin down where political sectarianism in America fits on a scale from zero to ''The Troubles.'' But nearly every protection that sectarian minorities pursue is either supported or under consideration by some element of the American right.  That includes the more ominous steps. In December, Rush Limbaugh said he thought conservatives were ''trending toward secession,'' as there cannot be a ''peaceful coexistence'' between liberals and conservatives. One-third of Republicans say they would support secession in a recent poll, along with one-fifth of Democrats.  One-third of Americans believe that violence could be justified to achieve political objectives. In a survey conducted in January, a majority of Republican voters agreed with the statement that the ''traditional American way of life is disappearing so fast that we may have to use force to save it.'' The violence at the Capitol on Jan. 6 suggests that the risks of sustained political violence or even insurgency can't be discounted.  Whatever risk of imminent and widespread violence might have existed in January appears to have passed for now.  Instead, Joe Biden was sworn in as president -- a person who did not attempt to arouse the passions of one sect against the other during his campaign. His nomination and election demonstrates that sectarianism, while on the rise, may still have limits in America: The median voter prefers bipartisanship and a de-escalation of political conflict, creating an incentive to run nonsectarian campaigns.  Yet whether Mr. Biden's presidency will de-escalate sectarian tensions is an open question.  Mr. Biden is pursuing an ambitious policy agenda, which may eventually refocus partisan debate on the issues or just further alienate one side on matters like immigration or the filibuster. Still, the authors of the Science paper write that ''emphasis on political ideas rather than political adversaries'' would quite likely be ''a major step in the right direction.''  And Mr. Biden himself does not seem to elicit much outrage from the conservative news media or rank-and-file -- perhaps because of his welcoming message or his identity as a 78-year-old white man from Scranton, Pa.  But sectarianism is not just about the conduct of the leader of a party -- it's about the conflict between two groups. Nearly anyone's conduct can worsen hostility between the two sides, even if it is not endorsed by the leadership of a national political party. Mr. Carlson and the congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene are only the latest examples.  It leaves America at an uncertain juncture. Mr. Biden may dampen sectarian tensions compared with Mr. Trump, but it is not clear whether festering grievances and resentments will fade into the background with so many others acting to stoke division.  Sectarianism, after all, can last for decades or even centuries after the initial cause for hostility has passed.  Supporters of Donald J. Trump faced off against supporters of Joseph R. Biden Jr. on Nov. 5 as ballots were counted inside a convention center in Philadelphia. The falsehood that the presidential election was somehow rigged in favor of Mr. Biden has animated many Trump supporters. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times); Rioters stormed the Capitol on Jan. 6. One-third of Americans believe violence could be justified to achieve political objectives.; Mr. Biden a day after the election. He is pursuing an ambitious agenda that may eventually refocus partisan debate on the issues. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE new_york_times); As political sectarianism has grown, the loudest partisan voices in Congress and on cable news have leaned into cultural warfare. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DINA LITOVSKY FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002v "
352		"    Tech and The Coming New Normal  By Kara Swisher  1,200 words 22 April 2021   25     Assessing its future, both the bad and the good.  The freaky video of the New York Police Department's robot dog owned the internet earlier this month. The minute that DigiDog creepily trotted out of a public housing building, many people decided that the ''Terminator'' future had arrived -- and that humanity was doomed.  Humanity is not doomed. But the hubbub got me thinking about how to assess the future of tech, both the bad and the good, in the wake of the pandemic.  Much like the major changes that raced through American society after the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic (also after World War I), this will be a jarring time. Here's my take on five of the key arenas we need to be thinking about post-pandemic.  [ Listen to Kara Swisher on ''Sway,'' a podcast about power : who has it, who's been denied it, and who dares to defy it .]  Telecommuting. Work, and specifically its shift from the office to the home, has been one of the most significant changes of the past year. Of course many jobs still require physical presence, but the number of workers who do not have to be analog is vast and growing.  These so-called knowledge workers have realized -- even with all the griping about being on Zoom all the time -- that it can be both cheaper and more productive to have a work force that is more flexible in terms of place and time.  No chief executives I've spoken with in recent months think that their company will have a significant amount of staffing in any kind of headquarters at any one time in the future. Facebook said this week that its employees could work at home permanently; this will become increasingly common.  And despite a number of impediments to virtual work -- including the very basic human need to connect in person -- the reams of data collected over the past year show remote work can be more productive. This information will lead to all manner of innovations -- and more remote work.  There is much to worry about here, of course, including the persistent tracking of workers and their effectiveness, at all tiers of the workplace. Also, managers will rely a lot less on anecdotal evidence than actual performance when it comes to evaluating worker productivity, which can be a good thing.  Telehealth. Health care is another area that was ripe for disruption prepandemic, as the industry had resisted tech for many years. A number of giant companies like Microsoft and Google have tried to streamline the consumer health experience, while many others have been part of digitizing the back end, but it's still a miasma of confusion. The pandemic only underscored the poor state of the country's health services.  The Covid-19 era is the first time in many decades that the well-off have had to experience the inadequate health services that have long been suffered by marginalized populations. Because of the mess that has been Covid testing and vaccine scheduling, among other examples, huge numbers of people now understand from firsthand experience the cost of our broken medical system.  No surprise, then, that there has also been a surge in the use of various telemedicine start-ups, such as mental health apps. While these bring legitimate and significant worries about security and the efficacy of online diagnostics (there is precious little room for error when it comes to health), those who run our hopelessly complex and expensive health systems will be looking for more cost-effective ways to deliver services.  Retail. Physical retail -- including restaurants and bars -- has been under enormous pressure for years, as tech companies have increasingly placed themselves between the goods and customers. All the while, tech companies have been building one moat after the next to solidify their strength by providing better service, streamlining delivery logistics and offering better prices.  Companies like Amazon -- and to a lesser extent other success stories like Uber Eats, Instacart and DoorDash -- have been girded in the pandemic. Consumers have been trained over the past year to use these various services and will continue to choose them over walking to a retailer or restaurant. These companies have established trusted brands, since they have become indispensable.  Again, data acquired over the past year will help these big companies improve service and target users. This means they have big advantages to further develop all manner of products.  People will surely do more in-person purchasing as the pandemic fades. But online commerce might now be ingrained as a daily practice, and innovations related to it are sure to make it even more powerful.  If you think Apple and Amazon won't be delivering and administering your next vaccine someday, for example, you need to think again.  Tele-education. Online education has not worked out so well in the past year. A reliance on virtual education has taken a toll on our mental health and revealed inequities in internet access. It's still a problematic experience for most users. Everyone I talk with agrees that it's been a failure for most students.  As they say often in tech, it did not scale well, in terms of technology, creativity and, mostly, in inspiring a love of learning. I don't blame teachers for not being able to transform their classes digitally -- most tried their best.  But in my house, way too much of the time my kids doodled, texted, played games and watched videos, all on their always riveting mobile phones.  All of this, despite the fact that online education has been around for a while. But developers have largely focused on making more education accessible to more people, rather than providing fresh products and services.  Post-pandemic, I would love to see a huge amount of investment going into making online learning both accessible and engaging. It's decidedly not -- and the opportunity is glaring.  Innovation. The most important thing to come out of the pandemic could be a flowering of innovation, across a wide variety of sectors. After the 1918 pandemic, the 1920s saw a burst of aggressive ideas, most especially with the introduction of the television.  While I can't predict what the 2020s equivalent of that will be, if I had to guess, I would say we'll see new breakthroughs related to the messenger RNA technology used to develop several Covid vaccines. Such a thing would be both ironic and fitting, and in keeping with how innovation works: Out of the ashes of great distress comes a major discovery. And the rest is, as they say, history.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Jim Datz/The new_york_times; Photographs by Alberto Cabanillas and marcoventuriniautieri/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00031 "
353		"    A Fast-Growing Industry Embraces America's Forests  By Gabriel Popkin and Erin Schaff  2,244 words 22 April 2021   20     GARYSBURG, N.C. -- In 2013, Kathy Claiborne got a noisy new neighbor. That's when a huge factory that dries and presses wood into roughly cigarette-filter-sized pellets roared to life near her tidy home in one of the state's poorest counties. On a recent afternoon in her front yard, near the end of a cul-de-sac, the mill rumbled like an uncomfortably close jet engine.  ''I can't even recall the last time I had a good night's sleep,'' said Ms. Claiborne, who in 2009 moved to the neighborhood, which is majority African-American. She wears a mask outdoors, she said, because dust from the plant can make it hard to breathe.  The slumberless factory's output is trucked to a port in Chesapeake, Va., and loaded on ships bound for Europe, where it will be burned to produce electricity and heat for millions of people. It's part of a fast-growing industry that, depending on whom you ask, is an unwelcome source of pollution or a much-needed creator of rural jobs; a forest protector, or a destroyer.  In barely a decade, the Southeast's wood pellet industry has grown from almost nothing to 23 mills with capacity to produce more than 10 million metric tons annually for export. It employs more than 1,000 people directly, and has boosted local logging and trucking businesses.  It is courting new markets in Asia -- Japan, which retreated from nuclear power after the 2011 Fukushima disaster, has become a major buyer of pellets -- and is lobbying for greater prominence in the United States. And it has backers at the Agriculture Department, which recently asked for suggestions on increasing wood bioenergy use.  Pellets are undoubtedly having a moment. The open question is whether a world increasingly desperate to avert climate disaster will continue to embrace, or turn away from, humanity's original fuel: wood.  Most divisive is the industry's claim to battle climate change by replacing dirty fossil fuels with clean bioenergy.  Many foresters, economists and environmental policy experts endorse that idea. But a legion of ecologists, conservationists and others strongly disagree. Some 500 recently wrote to heads of state including President Joseph R. Biden urging them to reject wood burning as a tool for fighting climate change.  Michael Regan, the new administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, is also seen as lukewarm. During his previous job running the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality, the department granted permits to mills but also required them to address air pollution and recommended against including wood bioenergy in the state's clean energy mix.  An EPA spokeswoman said the agency wasn't currently considering adding most wood pellets to its renewable fuel standard, an action that would raise their prospects here.  The story of industrial wood pellets in places like Northampton County begins in climate policy made an ocean away. In 2009, European officials decided to declare biomass energy -- basically, the burning of wood or other plants, rather than fossil fuels -- to be carbon neutral. The idea is that regrowing plants, over time, would ultimately reabsorb the carbon dioxide released by the burning.  Britain and other countries began subsidizing electrical utilities to build biomass plants or retrofit coal plants to burn wood. The largest power plant in Britain, Drax, which is based in Selby, in the north of England, now produces 2.6 gigawatts of electricity from biomass, versus just 1.3 gigawatts from coal. (One gigawatt is enough to power a medium-sized city.)  Drax buys pellets from Enviva -- a company based in Bethesda, Md., that bills itself as the world's largest pellet producer -- and others. It also operates its own pellet mills in Gulf Coast states.  Bioenergy has in recent years accounted for some 14 percent of Britain's total electricity generation. Denmark, Belgium and the Netherlands have also invested heavily.  Many scientists have long been skeptical of biomass's climate benefits. Wood releases more carbon dioxide per unit of electricity produced than coal or gas, and a newly planted tree can take decades to reabsorb the carbon dioxide emitted by burning. ''Wood is a sucky fuel,'' said Tim Searchinger, a researcher at Princeton.  In 2009, a group he led wrote in the journal Science protesting what they called a ''critical climate accounting error.'' They argued that certain major international climate policies and legislation designed to reduce countries' greenhouse gas emissions allow nations to burn biomass and discount their smokestack emissions but fail to account for the carbon losses caused by cutting down trees to burn them.  ''It's just cheating,'' Mr. Searchinger said.  Despite scientists' misgivings, policymakers barreled ahead. Europe's renewable-energy directive opened up a new, industrial-scale market.  The biggest supplier quickly became the rural United States Southeast, a patchwork of mostly privately owned hardwood forests, swamps, farms, small towns and pine trees. Lots and lots of pine trees.  Pellet makers source wood from thousands of landowners, who are often eager to earn revenue to offset land taxes. Enviva opened its first mill in Ahoskie, N.C., in 2011, promising to make pellets mainly from wood ''residues'' such as tree tops, branches and sawdust with no other market.  When land is logged, the thick, straight trunks typically go to a sawmill that churns out things like two-by-fours. Pellet makers take small pieces that may have no other market and vie with makers of paper, cardboard boxes and diaper fluff for the rest. About 3 percent of harvested wood from the South goes to pellets, according to Consuelo Brandeis, a research forester with the United States Forest Service.  Environmental groups say they have documented truckloads of logs and whole trees, not just leftovers, entering pellet mills. Publicly available images show logs stacked at mills, and a reporter outside a pellet mill entrance saw trucks of logs entering.  Pellet makers' pledges to rely on waste wood ''painted them into a corner,'' said Robert Abt, a forest economist at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, because the wood-products industry already used its supplies relatively efficiently, leaving little waste.  While longer pieces of wood that are too crooked or knotted for sawmills do make up part of Enviva's supply, Jennifer Jenkins, Enviva's chief sustainability officer, who holds a Ph.D. in ecosystem ecology, said the company's sourcing was sustainable because it buys only from landowners who commit to regrow trees, and because the Southeast's forests overall are expanding. Pellets sourced from such regions should be considered carbon neutral, according to accounting rules laid out by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations body that provides scientific information on climate change, Dr. Jenkins said.  Dr. Jenkins said the company had installed air pollution controls that exceed requirements. A community relations manager said he had received no noise complaints related to the Northampton County mill.  The United States wood pellet industry, which exported more than seven million tons of pellets last year, has generated strong opinions in North Carolina.  At a morning meeting organized by Enviva outside a Cracker Barrel late last month, local leaders hailed the company's contributions to the economy, schools and vocational training programs. An ongoing expansion of the Enviva plant in Garysburg ''will bring great things,'' said Charles Tyner, the county commission chairman.  Half a state away, in Moore County, Jesse Wimberley, coordinator for the Sandhills Prescribed Burn Association, a nonprofit conservation group, is thrilled that Enviva is buying small, scraggly oaks growing thick under some longleaf pines. The removal of the oaks, followed by controlled burns of the forest floor, is crucial for regenerating the longleaf savanna ecosystem, which has shrunk by more than 90 percent in the past four centuries.  On a recent afternoon, a Caterpillar loader grabbed the oaks, shook out loose vines and shoved them into a chipper. The chipper spewed out a high-speed stream into a truck bound for a nearby Enviva mill.  Before that mill opened, the land trust that owns the site would have had to clear the oaks at its own expense, Mr. Wimberley said. ''When you have the right market, you can have the restoration paying for itself.''  Richie Harding, a pastor in Northampton County, took a dimmer view.  He said he was incensed that Enviva had plopped its mill amid established neighborhoods. ''Northampton County has a lot of land,'' he said. ''Why would you put it in the backyard of these people?''  Pellet mills, which can emit volatile organic compounds and other hazardous air pollutants, are 50 percent more likely to be located near ''environmental justice-designated'' communities, defined as counties with above-average poverty levels and a population that's at least 25 percent nonwhite, according to an analysis by the Dogwood Alliance, an environmental nonprofit based in Asheville.  Derb Carter, a Chapel Hill-based lawyer for the Southern Environmental Law Center, voiced another concern. He and colleagues have tracked some of Enviva's source material to bottomland forests that have the some of the nation's highest tree biodiversity. In 2016, a global partnership named the Atlantic Coastal Plain, most of which is in the Southeast, a biodiversity hot spot, recognizing both its unique plant species and its rate of habitat loss.  Enviva said it now sources only from bottomlands it considers nonsensitive and that these provide only 1 percent of its supply.  Mr. Carter said he viewed such claims with skepticism. ''They play word games,'' he said.  The company said its sourcing practices now beat industry standards and that it encourages suppliers to certify their forests as sustainable, though it acknowledged that most are still not certified. (Enviva as a whole maintains several sustainability certifications.) ''Enviva has grown and learned over time,'' said Dr. Jenkins, the Enviva executive.  She also disputed two recent investigations that the Dogwood Alliance claims show trees harvested from wet bottomlands.  Whether Enviva's actions promote sustainable forests may depend on one's definitions of ''sustainable'' and ''forest.''  Owen Strickler, who owns a 6,000-acre woods in Virginia that Enviva describes as a model, and who calls the pellet industry ''a good thing,'' manages a mosaic of different-age loblolly pine stands. When one area is harvested, Mr. Strickler sprays the native hardwoods that pop up with herbicide and plants more fast-growing loblollies.  Dr. Jenkins laid out the industry's case: Pellet demand creates an incentive for landowners like Mr. Strickler to grow more trees, which suck up more carbon, offsetting the carbon dioxide emitted from power plant smokestacks. The argument has support from some forestry experts and economists such as Dr. Abt.  One recent study found that, through 2017, commercially harvestable forests near pellet mills in the Southeast had more carbon stored in trees than forests farther away, indirectly supporting Dr. Jenkins's argument.  Dr. Jenkins acknowledged, however, that there is no direct evidence that Enviva's presence has added any carbon to America's forests to offset the carbon dioxide emitted from European smokestacks.  Even if the Southeast's forest carbon is increasing, ''it doesn't mean everyone is off the hook,'' said Francisco X. Aguilar, a researcher at the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences in Umea, who led the recent study. His data revealed potentially concerning trends, including fewer standing dead trees and losses of carbon from the soil of forests near mills in the Southeast, suggesting the pellet industry may be taking wood that otherwise would have decomposed on site, feeding the soil.  Pellet opponents have scored some successes, forcing the installation of pollution controls at mills. The Dutch Parliament recently banned subsidies for new biomass plants. This year, the European Union is expected to announce new regulations for wood pellet sourcing.  Still, the industry's growth continues. Permits have been filed for a dozen new mills, according to the Southern Environmental Law Center,. Enviva's newest corporate office is in Tokyo; the company expects Asian countries to eventually buy roughly half its pellets, according to a spokeswoman.  Despite the industry's optimism, even its supporters stress that pellets cannot fully replace fossil fuels. Gert-Jan Nabuurs, a professor of forest resources at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, has calculated that the Southeast might be able to sustainably supply 35 million metric tons of pellets annually, roughly three times today's production capacity.  ''If indeed the whole world starts to ask for pellets, then things go out of control,'' Dr. Nabuurs said. ''That's very obvious.''  Erin Schaff contributed reporting.  Erin Schaff contributed reporting.  Top, a tree being dragged to a wood chipper, a step toward being transformed by Enviva into wood pellets. Above, privately owned forest that has been clear-cut and now sits mostly underwater next to the Roanoke River near Williamston, N.C. The wood pellets, below right, are used for fuel. (A20-A21); Above, a bottomland hardwood forest in Virginia. Below left, a loblolly pine seedling planted after a clear-cut in Franklin, Va.; KATHY CLAIBORNE of Garysburg, N.C., after a pellet mill went up near her house.; JESSE WIMBERLEY, coordinator for the nonprofit conservation group Sandhills Prescribed Burn Association.; JENNIFER JENKINS, sustainability officer, claiming Enviva's sourcing has become much more sustainable.; RICHIE HARDING, a pastor in the county.; DERB CARTER, a lawyer for the Southern Environmental Law Center, referring to Enviva's sustainability claims. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ERIN SCHAFF) (A21)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002u "
354		"    George Floyd 'Changed the World'  859 words 22 April 2021   24     Readers discuss a proclamation by Mr. Floyd's young daughter and note the key roles played by the judge and the teenager who took the nine-minute video.  To the Editor:  Re ''Chauvin Guilty of Murder in Floyd's Death'' (front page, April 21):  Almost a year ago, I watched a video of George Floyd's little daughter, Gianna, sitting on the shoulders of a close friend of her father, proudly stating, in an excited and raised voice: ''Daddy changed the world!''  I fought back tears, because it seemed clear that this 6-year-old girl did not fully appreciate what it would mean to grow up without a father. She was caught up in the media fanfare of the moment, in the aftermath of the murder.  Now, with the guilty verdict, we have a closing bookend of sorts. Based on that verdict, and other events that are sure to follow in the society at large, it can indeed be said that this little girl spoke a truth when she said, ''Daddy changed the world!''  Indeed he did.  David S. Lifton  Las Vegas  To the Editor:  Re ''With a Cry of 'We Matter,' Catharsis and Relief'' (front page, April 21):  I was moved to tears that George Floyd was given a measure of justice by the conviction of his killer, the former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin.  But it is a hollow feeling in many ways because as a white person, I feel it is not my right to decree that our country in any way is cleansed of its racist ways, and we as a country applaud ourselves for entertaining such a belief at our own peril.  We are expecting our first grandchild this fall, and I could not help but imagine the fear for that child's safety I would still feel if that child were Black.  Until the time arrives that such a child and its family can feel safe in their own homes or in public regardless of their race, I will refrain from breathing a sigh of relief. And until moments like the Chauvin conviction become the rule rather than the exception, I will refrain from celebrating.  Greg Joseph  Sun City, Ariz.  To the Editor:  Overlooked in the jubilation about the conviction of Derek Chauvin for the murder of George Floyd is the enormous debt we owe to Judge Peter A. Cahill, who conducted this trial with such brilliant administration of the law.  From the beginning, with his decision about televising the trial so that we could all see and hear what the jury saw and heard, to his ruling that the jury be sequestered for deliberations, he oversaw the proceedings throughout firmly, calmly and in an unbiased manner that made us trust the fairness of the trial. We are so lucky to have had such a man at such a time.  Shirley Stuart  Berkeley, Calif.  To the Editor:  Cheering a jury verdict that results in a former police officer being led from the courtroom in handcuffs feels wrong; this is a moment that should generate deep sadness in our hearts and minds. This is no time for dancing in the streets. Our heads are lowered in shame because somewhere along the line a public servant who promised to protect and serve lost his way and went rogue.  David Jefferson Harris  New Brunswick, N.J.  To the Editor:  Re ''Teenager's Video Shaped Course of Trial'' (news article, April 21):  Darnella Frazier's role in the Chauvin convictions cannot be overstated. She had the presence of mind to shoot the video that was all the evidence anyone needed to know this cop committed murder. Without the video, I can't imagine Derek Chauvin would have been convicted. Thank God there is a measure of justice for George Floyd.  Jay Margolis  Delray Beach, Fla.  To the Editor:  Re ''Explaining the Chauvin Verdict to My Kids,'' by Esau McCaulley (Op-Ed, April 21):  Dr. McCaulley's heartfelt and profound essay on how to tell his son and his students the truths about our imperfect and often evil world, in order to inspire them to fight against those injustices, lists several vital ways to do so: ''They can plan, organize, protest and march.''  But he left out another vital tool: They can vote. The more engaged and justice-seeking youth who vote, the more likely we will finally have local, state and federal governments enacting racially just laws. This includes voting out of office those officials who either pretend there are no such problems or, worse, who perpetuate and aggravate the injustices by their own bigotry.  James Berkman  Boston  To the Editor:  Re '''A Horrendous Tragedy': The Chaotic Moments Before a Police Shooting in Columbus'' (nytimes.com, April 21):  I hate to sound naïve, but why do officers have to shoot to kill?  While we were awaiting the verdict in the George Floyd case, a teenager was fatally shot while brandishing a knife. Surely the officers could have subdued her without using lethal force.  Susan Gilbert  Exeter, N.H.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Carlos Barria/Reuters FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00037 "
355		"    Allegations Against Biographer Halt Shipping of His Roth Book  By Alexandra Alter and Rachel Abrams  1,907 words 22 April 2021   1     W.W. Norton, citing the accusations that the author, Blake Bailey, faces, said it would stop shipping and promoting his new best-selling book.  Earlier this month, the biographer Blake Bailey was approaching what seemed like the apex of his literary career. Reviews of his highly anticipated Philip Roth biography appeared before the book came out, with major stories in magazines and literary publications. It landed on the new_york_times best-seller list this week.  Now, allegations against Mr. Bailey, 57, have emerged, including claims that he sexually assaulted two women, one as recently as 2015, and that he behaved inappropriately toward middle school students when he was a teacher in the 1990s.  His publisher, W.W. Norton, took swift and unusual action: It said on Wednesday that it had stopped shipments and promotion of his book. ''These allegations are serious,'' it said in a statement. ''In light of them, we have decided to pause the shipping and promotion of 'Philip Roth: The Biography' pending any further information that may emerge.''  Norton, which initially printed 50,000 copies of the title, has stopped a 10,000-copy second printing that was scheduled to arrive in early May. It has also halted advertising and media outreach, and events that Norton arranged to promote the book are being canceled. The pullback from the publisher came just days after Mr. Bailey's literary agency, The Story Factory, said it had dropped him as a client.  In an email Wednesday night, Mr. Bailey denied the allegations, calling them ''categorically false and libelous.'' A lawyer for Mr. Bailey, Billy Gibbens, said in an email that his client ''disagrees with Norton's decision to stop promoting his book.'' Some of the allegations were reported earlier by The Times-Picayune/New Orleans Advocate and the Los Angeles Times.  An acclaimed literary biographer of masters like Richard Yates, John Cheever and Charles Jackson and the author of a memoir of his own, Mr. Bailey has received the Guggenheim Fellowship and was a Pulitzer finalist for his Cheever biography. Mr. Roth handpicked him to write the biography after meeting with him in 2012; he terminated an earlier agreement with another biographer in 2009.  While one early review in The New Republic was critical of both Mr. Bailey's and Mr. Roth's treatment of women in the biography, other reviews were more positive. In The new_york_times Book Review, the novelist Cynthia Ozick called it ''a narrative masterwork both of wholeness and particularity, of crises wedded to character, of character erupting into insight, insight into desire, and desire into destiny.'' The Washington Post described it as ''a colorful, confident and uncompromising biographical triumph.''  Several of the allegations against Mr. Bailey focus on his behavior when he was an 8th-grade English teacher at Lusher, a middle school in New Orleans, but a previously unreported allegation is from 2015.  That same year, Valentina Rice, a publishing executive, met Mr. Bailey at the home of Dwight Garner, a book critic for The Times, and his wife in Frenchtown, N.J. A frequent guest at their home, Ms. Rice, 47, planned to stay overnight, as did Mr. Bailey, she said.  After she went to bed, Mr. Bailey entered her room and raped her, she said. She said ''no'' and ''stop'' repeatedly, she said in an interview.  Mr. Garner, who had previously been an editor at The Times, said he had first interacted with Mr. Bailey when he had assigned him book reviews to write. Mr. Garner did not know Mr. Bailey well, he said, and this was the only time he had been invited to his house.  Mr. Garner was horrified to hear Ms. Rice's account, he said. He added that he and Mr. Bailey do not have a relationship.  A friend of Ms. Rice, Eliot Nolen, told the Times that she remembers Ms. Rice saying that she was assaulted by Mr. Bailey about a week after the party. Ms. Rice said she decided against reporting it to the police.  About three years later, prompted by the growing #MeToo movement and encouraged by friends, Ms. Rice, using an email account under a pseudonym, wrote to Julia A. Reidhead, the president of Norton, accusing Mr. Bailey of nonconsensual sex. She also emailed a new_york_times reporter, who responded, but Ms. Rice decided not to pursue it further and did not reply.  ''I have not felt able to report this to the police but feel I have to do something and tell someone in the interests of protecting other women,'' she wrote, adding: ''I understand that you would need to confirm this allegation which I am prepared to do, if you can assure me of my anonymity even if it is likely Mr. Bailey will know exactly who I am.''  Ms. Reidhead did not respond, Ms. Rice said. But a week after she sent it, Ms. Rice received an email from Mr. Bailey, who said that his publisher had forwarded her note.  ''I can assure you I have never had non-consensual sex of any kind, with anybody, ever, and if it comes to a point I shall vigorously defend my reputation and livelihood,'' he wrote in the email, which the Times reviewed. ''Meanwhile, I appeal to your decency: I have a wife and young daughter who adore and depend on me, and such a rumor, even untrue, would destroy them.''  ''We took this allegation very seriously. We were aware that the allegation was also sent to two people at Mr. Bailey's former employer and to a reporter at the new_york_times, a news organization that was well equipped to look into it,'' a Norton spokeswoman said. ''We did take steps, including asking Mr. Bailey about the allegations, which he categorically denied, and we were mindful of the sender's request for a guarantee of anonymity.''  Former students recall him as a charismatic role model who treated them as intellectual peers. But he also created an atmosphere of intimacy that could cross the line, like encouraging students to write about romantic relationships in journals that they submitted to him for comments. ''There was an environment of dirty jokes and permissiveness,'' said Elizabeth Gross, a former student who now teaches at Tulane University. Some students said his remarks and behavior were attempts to ''groom'' them for sexual encounters years later.  Eve Peyton, 40, a former student who now works in publicity at a high school in New Orleans, said that Mr. Bailey raped her when she was a graduate student. When she was his student, he treated her as ''one of his special girls,'' she said, attention that felt flattering and reaffirming at the time.  In June 2003, she was a graduate student at the University of Missouri School of Journalism and engaged to be married. She and Mr. Bailey both happened to be visiting New Orleans at the same time and met for drinks. Afterward, he invited her back to the place he was staying, where he kissed her, initiated oral sex, and when she squirmed away, he pinned her to the bed and forcibly had sex with her, she said. He finally stopped when she told him she wasn't using birth control, she recalled.  After he drove her to her father's house, where she was staying, Mr. Bailey said he had ''wanted her'' since the day they met, when she was 12, Ms. Peyton said.  She told two friends about the assault shortly after it happened but didn't go to the police, in part because she was overwhelmed and wanted to move on with her life, she said. She later began seeing a therapist with experience in sexual assault counseling.  One of her friends, Catherine Roach, who is now a professor of art history at Virginia Commonwealth University, remembers the call from Ms. Peyton that summer.  ''She called me and told me that he raped her, that she told him no and he didn't stop,'' Ms. Roach said. ''I remember that she told me that he held her down.''  In an email reviewed by the Times, Mr. Bailey apologized to Ms. Peyton for his behavior days after the encounter, and asked her not to speak to others about it. She last heard from him in the summer of 2020, when Mr. Bailey wrote her again, in a message also reviewed by the Times, in which he alluded to ''the awfulness on that night 17 years ago'' and said he was suffering from mental illness at the time.  Today, even hearing his voice on the radio, promoting his book, is painful, Ms. Peyton said. ''It seems inescapable.''  Until the recent allegations emerged, Mr. Bailey led a charmed literary life. He lucked into biography when he convinced the daughter of another novelist, Richard Yates, to cooperate on an authorized biography. A book deal followed, which led to several other biographies. In 2012, Mr. Bailey approached Mr. Roth, after learning the novelist had cast off his earlier chosen biographer. Mr. Roth agreed and gave him unprecedented access to his archives and papers. On a panel, Mr. Bailey said he won Mr. Roth over by assuring the novelist that he would not take ''too prim or judgmental of a view of a man who had this florid love life.''  In halting the distribution of the book to retailers, Norton took a rare step to distance the company from the author. Publishers will occasionally pull or recall books over major factual inaccuracies or fabrications, but it's rare for revelations about an author's private behavior to result in a book's life cycle being cut short. Norton's response, which will impede the sales of a best-selling book, is a financial blow for the company, which paid Mr. Bailey a mid-six-figure advance, according to a person familiar with the deal.  The controversy that has engulfed Mr. Bailey erupted in part because of the publicity he has received for his Roth biography, which led some of the women accusing him of misconduct to come forward.  Some of them have noted that they were bothered not only by the praise lavished on Mr. Bailey, but by the way, in his Roth biography, that he seemed to excuse the writer's misogyny. Several literary critics seized on the fact that in the biography, Mr. Bailey brushed off Mr. Roth's mistreatment of women.  The discussions about Bailey's behavior toward his former students began to build in a private Facebook group and later spilled into public as several women left comments accusing Mr. Bailey of grooming his female middle school students on a site operated by the blogger Ed Champion, which highlighted Mr. Roth's misogynistic views.  After reports of Mr. Bailey's misconduct came to light, some prominent authors and critics have distanced themselves. The writer Mary Karr, in a tweet, remarked that she had just participated in an event with Mr. Bailey to discuss the Roth biography. ''I wake to find Bailey credibly accused by three of his former eighth-grade students of grooming them for sex when they turned eighteen,'' she said. ''I support any brave young woman speaking out.''  ''Philip Roth: The Biography'' went on sale earlier this month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY W.W. Norton, via Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m00034 "
356		"    You Pfizer, Me Moderna: Vaccine Recipients Declare Loyalty  By Alyson Krueger  1,124 words 22 April 2021   4     Along with comparison of side effects, there is pride, relief and merch.  ''I'm in a mixed marriage,'' tweeted David Thomas, 51. ''I got Pfizer, and my wife is getting the Moderna vaccine today. How will this affect our kids?''  Mr. Thomas, who works in printing and lives in Plymouth, Mich., was clearly joking. ''Just pretending like we care which vaccine we got makes it fun,'' he said. ''It's like a game to say, 'I'm on Team Pfizer, or I'm on Team Moderna.'''  But, suffused with relief after a year of isolation and loss, many people are getting quite attached to the companies that made their shots, some even buying T-shirts that broadcast the tribe they've ''joined'' (call it pharmcore).  All three Covid-19 vaccines available in America are remarkably effective. As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention put it, ''The best Covid-19 vaccine is the first one that is available to you.'' Most people aren't even in a position to choose which one they get. ''It's like the sorting hat in 'Harry Potter,''' said Mr. Thomas.  Still, a friendly rivalry has taken hold across America with vaccinated people professing loyalty to the brand they happened to have received.  Selfies with vaccine cards now come with the caption #TeamPfizer or #TeamModerna. TikTokers making fun of the brands they didn't receive are going viral. And some people joining in the playful rivalry are questioning their privilege, asking themselves why they care and how their posturing might look to others in the world who have no vaccine at all.  When Beth Wilensky, 48, a law professor at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, was given a last-minute vaccine slot at a nearby Walmart last month, she didn't care which vaccine she received. ''The numbers were going up here,'' she said. ''I was thrilled to get any of them.''  A few weeks later the C.D.C. announced it would pause the use of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, the one she received. Rather than feel fear, however, Ms. Wilensky felt defiant. ''As someone who got the J. & J., I want to shout to rooftops how happy I am,'' she tweeted. ''Maybe I should start a J. & J. fan club to show some love to this unfairly maligned vaccine?''  She believes her loyalty comes from deep gratitude for relief from worry. ''I got the shot, and two weeks later I felt very confident I wasn't going to get severely ill,'' she said.  Now there is also loyalty. ''There are so few people who got J. & J. compared to the other vaccines, that there is a little bit of a, 'we are small but mighty' thing,'' she said.  When people announce they've received a Covid-19 vaccination others usually respond by asking which one. Ms. Wilensky has a theory about why people even bother to ask. ''Vaccine clinics are these amazing sites where people feel relief after a year of anxiety and devastation,'' she said. ''People are looking for a way to keep talking about such a positive thing.''  Linda Hirshman, whose book ''Victory: The Triumphant Gay Revolution'' explores the AIDS pandemic, is fully on team Pfizer. ''I am a complete fan girl of science. As to the Pfizer brand, I love them,'' she said. ''It's funny. I am not fussy about which pneumonia vaccine I get.''  Unlike the flu shot which seems to just appear at the end of the summer, many in isolation have been following the every move of these pharmaceutical companies during the pandemic, eagerly awaiting every trial result, every announcement, to see if they could pull off the scientific marvel that would bring us life back to something like normal. ''It was the race for the cure,'' Ms. Hirshman said. ''We will now cheer for whoever got it done for us.''  ''What do people do when they get a miracle?'' she added. ''It's a little weird to go to the temple and thank God for the mRNA vaccine, so they thank Pfizer or Moderna instead.''  Sam Lee from San Diego and Luke Brewer from Lansing, Mich., opened a shop on Etsy named ViralMerchCo three weeks ago, mostly to sell T-shirts and sweatshirts that advertise a vaccine brand. The items say phrases like ''Pfizer alumni'' and come in a range of colors.  ''We saw 'vaccinated' posts all over social media. Many of the people posting also posted which vaccine they received, and it seemed like people took a lot of pride in this,'' Mr. Lee said. ''We gave the people what they were looking for.'' They said they've almost a hundred items, and other Etsy shops provide similar apparel.  Ellyn Marsh, a Broadway actress, knew she struck a chord when she posted a video on TikTok where she was pretending to dance in a club and bragging over the music about which vaccine she got. ''It got a million and a half views really quickly,'' she said. ''I was like OK, 'This is something people want to talk about.'''  She's continued the parodies. A clip she posted last week showed Pfizer and Moderna as ''frenemies,'' gossiping on the phone about Johnson & Johnson's pause. ''I'm just delivering,'' announced Pfizer, looking glamorous while sipping champagne.  Ms. Marsh made these videos after observing the behavior of people around her. ''People were talking on social media about their symptoms, their first dose, the second dose, which vaccine they got,'' she said. ''I just found it all really funny.'' She also noticed she felt loyalty to her vaccine. ''I did get Pfizer,'' she said. ''I am happy, I am lucky, I am grateful.''  TikTok users as far away as Germany, Brazil, Croatia, and Portugal left comments.  The gist of them: you should feel lucky you got any vaccine. ''I was Google translating some of them, and they were such an eye opener for me,'' she said. ''In other countries they were crossing a finger for any vaccine, and here we are comparing our vaccines and our symptoms. It's like 'OK, we need to check our privilege.'''  Still, turning something that is ultimately a medical procedure involving needles into a trendy bragging right might serve a higher purpose. ''I think it helps counter the anti-vax people,'' Mr. Thomas said. ''It gets people to do something by making it cool, fun, and visible.''  ''I think my wife and I should get different shirts that say Pfizer and Moderna,'' he added. ''It will get the word out that, 'Hey, we got vaccines, and they are all good.''  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Luisa Jung FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002w "
357		"    What Least Vaccinated Counties Have in Common: Trump Voters  By Danielle Ivory, Lauren Leatherby and Robert Gebeloff  2,086 words 22 April 2021   6     About 31 percent of adults in the United States have now been fully vaccinated. Scientists have estimated that 70 to 90 percent of the total population must acquire resistance to the virus to reach herd immunity. But in hundreds of counties around the country, vaccination rates are low, with some even languishing in the teens.  The disparity in vaccination rates has so far mainly broken down along political lines. The new_york_times examined survey and vaccine administration data for nearly every U.S. county and found that both willingness to receive a vaccine and actual vaccination rates to date were lower, on average, in counties where a majority of residents voted to re-elect former President Donald J. Trump in 2020. The phenomenon has left some places with a shortage of supply and others with a glut.  For months, health officials across the United States have been racing to inoculate people as variants of the coronavirus have continued to gain a foothold, carrying mutations that can make infections more contagious and, in some cases, deadlier. Vaccinations have sped up, and in many places, people are still unable to book appointments because of high demand. In Michigan, where cases have spiraled out of control, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, recently urged President Biden to send additional doses.  But in more rural -- and more Republican -- areas, health officials said that supply is far exceeding demand.  In a county in Wyoming, a local health official asked the state to stop sending first doses of the vaccine because the freezer was already stuffed to capacity with unwanted vials.  In an Iowa county, a clinic called people who had volunteered to give shots to tell them not to come in because so few residents had signed up for appointments.  In a county in Pennsylvania, a hospital set up a drive-through in the park, stocked with roughly 1,000 vaccine doses. Only about 300 people showed up.  And in interviews with more than two dozen state and county health officials -- including some who said they were feeling weary after a year of hearing relatives, neighbors and lifelong friends tell them that virus was a hoax or not particularly serious -- most attributed low vaccination rates at least partly to hesitant conservative populations.  ''I just never in a million years ever expected my field of work to become less medical and more political,'' said Hailey Bloom, a registered Republican and the public information officer for the health department that covers Natrona County, Wyo., which Mr. Trump won by a wide margin last year.  The health department, Ms. Bloom said, set up a clinic in a former Macy's at the local mall and was prepared to give 1,500 shots a day, four days a week. But it has never been able to fill all the slots, she said; usually, 300 or 400 people show up.  Ms. Bloom, like many other county officials, said she feared that reaching herd immunity might not be possible in her community. ''It's terrifying to think that this may never end,'' she said. ''So much hinges on these vaccinations.''  About 27 percent of Natrona County's adult residents have been fully vaccinated, and the federal government has estimated, based on Census survey data, that about 32 percent of its residents may be hesitant to get a shot.  The relationship between vaccination and politics reflects demographics. Vaccine hesitancy is highest in counties that are rural and have lower income levels and college graduation rates -- the same characteristics found in counties that were more likely to have supported Mr. Trump. In wealthier Trump-supporting counties with higher college graduation rates, the vaccination gap is smaller, the analysis found, but the partisan gap holds even after accounting for income, race and age demographics, population density and a county's infection and death rate. The Times's analysis used data current through last Friday.  When asked in polls about their vaccination plans, Republicans across the country have been far less likely than Democrats to say they plan to get shots. Most recently, last week, Monmouth University and Quinnipiac University polls indicated that almost half of Republicans did not plan to pursue vaccinations. Only around one in 20 Democrats said the same.  Using survey data collected in March, the federal government recently created new estimates of hesitancy for every county and state in the United States. Department of Health and Human Services modelers used demographic factors and state-level responses of adults who said they would ''probably not'' or ''definitely not'' get a Covid-19 vaccine from the Household Pulse Survey, then used Census data to estimate the share of residents who might say that in every county.  In more than 500 counties, at least a quarter of adults might be unwilling to get vaccinated, according to the estimates, and a majority of these places supported Mr. Trump in the last election.  In the 10 states where the government projected that residents would be least hesitant to get a Covid-19 vaccine, voters chose Mr. Biden in the 2020 election. Mr. Trump won nine of the 10 states where the most residents said they would probably or definitely not get the vaccine. (He did not win Georgia, which is among those states.)  Dr. Jean Stachon, the health officer in Sweetwater County, Wyo., where federal officials have estimated that about 31 percent of residents may be reluctant to receive a vaccine, said her department had made the tough philosophical decision to prioritize getting shots to the willing. At least once, that has meant opening a vial even when there were not enough interested people to use up all the doses in it.  ''It pains me to think that the governor of Michigan is begging for vaccines,'' she said. ''And we've got vials and vials in our freezer.''  Dr. Stachon, who has been both a registered Democrat and Republican in the past and considers herself politically independent, said she had not given up hope. Sweetwater has fully vaccinated about 29 percent of its adult residents. Mr. Trump won the county by a margin of more than 50 points last year.  In Grant County, N.D., home to about 2,400 people, the federal government has estimated that 31 percent of the population may not be willing to get a shot. Mr. Trump won the county by a wide margin last year.  ''People tell me, 'I would like to wait' -- it's the No. 1 thing I'm hearing,'' said Erin Ourada, the administrator for Custer Health, which serves Grant and four other counties. ''I keep seeing Grant County sit at the bottom of the list. It makes me sad.'' About 13 percent of adult residents there have been fully vaccinated.  Actual vaccination data has revealed a pattern similar to what polling and the federal estimates have shown. The Times analyzed data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Census Bureau and found a party split that was significant, though smaller.  In counties where a majority of residents voted for Mr. Trump in the 2020 election, adult vaccination rates were lower, on average, than in counties where a majority of residents voted for Mr. Biden. The rate was especially low in counties where Mr. Trump dominated, falling below 1 in 4 residents in counties where the former president won by a margin of 50 or more points.  The divide in vaccination rates remained even after accounting for a variety of factors, including infection rates, population density and educational attainment.  The vaccination data may not match the split predicted in the polling data because of the way the rollouts have been organized in the United States, with all states giving preference to older Americans early on and with younger adults in many states qualifying only recently. A recent poll showed that older Republicans were less resistant to becoming vaccinated than younger Republicans.  The rate of full vaccination for older adults in Republican-leaning counties was 5 percent lower than the national average, the Times analysis found, but the rate for younger adults was 18 percent below average. It is an indication that the partisan divide in vaccinations may actually grow wider as younger people become eligible for the vaccine nationwide.  It's possible that some of the differences in vaccination rates are driven by distribution issues and eligibility rules, said Jed Kolko, the chief economist at Indeed.com, who has studied partisan aspects of the pandemic. But as eligibility becomes more universal, ''the more the differences will be about hesitancy alone,'' he said.  The share of vaccine doses that each state uses may provide clues about how hesitancy will unfold going forward.  At the beginning of March, all states were able to administer a similar share of doses delivered to them. But now, some states are lagging. On average, the 10 states where residents were least hesitant to get the Covid-19 vaccine, according to federal estimates, have administered 82 percent of the doses that they have received. The 10 states where residents were most hesitant have used 72 percent.  Dr. Lisa Cooper, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Equity, said she was not surprised that conservative-leaning people might be less likely to want a vaccine.  ''These are people who were fed untruths about how this virus wasn't real,'' Dr. Cooper said. ''I think it is carrying through in the vaccination realm, too.''  To be sure, there are counties that supported Mr. Trump in the last election and now have above-average vaccination rates.  Some officials in those counties said their rates have lately plateaued.  In Tama County, Iowa, where Mr. Trump won by a wide margin last year and the vaccination rate is above the national average, the health department runs a clinic a few days a week at a former juvenile correctional facility.  Until recently, staff and volunteers were regularly giving shots to about 120 to 150 people in a day, according to Shannon Zoffka, the executive director of the department and a registered Democrat. When the state expanded its eligibility rules to include all adults, she expected the phones to be ringing off the hook. Instead, she said, about 120 people made appointments for the entire past week.  ''When you hit that saturation point, you don't realize it's coming,'' she said. ''It just happens.''  Likewise, some counties that supported Mr. Biden are now lagging in vaccination efforts. In Hudson County, N.J., which supported Mr. Biden by a wide margin last year, about 25 percent of adult residents have been fully vaccinated.  David Drumeler, the deputy county administrator and a registered Democrat, said that there was not enough supply to meet the demand and that many residents, some of whom do not have cars, were having difficulty getting to mass vaccination sites elsewhere in the state. Mr. Drumeler said that the county was strictly policing a residency requirement in the county to make sure its supply was reaching its intended target.  ''It's so frustrating to be so low on the percentage of folks getting vaccinated when all our shots are getting into arms,'' Mr. Drumeler said. ''But hesitancy is not a hurdle we are encountering yet.''  The situation is quite the opposite in Potter County, Pa., where Mr. Trump won by a wide margin, and where a recent drive-through vaccine clinic failed to draw large crowds.  Kevin Cracknell, who has spent 13 years as a registered nurse in the intensive care unit at the local hospital, said his biggest fear was that very few people in the area would get vaccinated and, as a result, waves of infection would continue to sweep through the community for years to come.  Mr. Cracknell, a registered Democrat, recalled a time this past January when patients with the virus -- people he knew from town -- began to fill the beds in his hospital.  ''It's like no other virus I've seen in my life,'' he said. ''The damage it does to the lungs.''  Mr. Cracknell let out a long breath. ''Most of my patients supported Trump,'' he said. ''I love them to death. I want them to succeed. I want them to be healthy.''  So far, only about 15 percent of adults in the county have been fully vaccinated.  Timmy Facciola, Emily Schwing and Tiffany Wong contributed reporting. Sheelagh McNeill contributed research.  Document NYTF000020210422eh4m0002t "
358		"    With a Cry of 'We Matter,' Catharsis and Relief  By Shaila Dewan and Julie Bosman  1,458 words 21 April 2021   1     People across the country reacted with a variety of emotions to the news of the former officer's conviction on all charges in the killing of George Floyd.  MINNEAPOLIS -- Outside the Cup Foods convenience store where George Floyd was killed last May, a woman nearly collapsed in tears upon hearing the guilty verdicts against Derek Chauvin, the police officer who killed Mr. Floyd.  ''We matter,'' she said, straightening up. ''We matter.''  In one Minneapolis neighborhood, jubilant residents honked horns and banged pots and pans out their windows. Hundreds of people who were facing the courthouse began pumping their fists in unison as the news whipped through the crowd. ''Guilty!'' they shouted, and then began to chant: ''All three counts! All three counts!''  When Minneapolis heard the verdict in the trial of Mr. Chauvin, it was a moment of catharsis for many in the city, a scene of collective relief and satisfaction that he had been convicted on two murder charges and one manslaughter charge in Mr. Floyd's death.  Those scenes were echoed, sometimes in quieter ways, across the country, as Americans paused from working, running errands or picking up their children from school to listen as Judge Peter A. Cahill announced the verdict. For some Black Americans in particular, the moment was especially poignant, an affirmation that justice had been served for Mr. Floyd.  Don Jackson, a 33-year-old tech worker, was leaving work in Chicago's Loop as the news of Mr. Chauvin's conviction spread through downtown. ''I didn't have a lot of hope that they would get it right,'' he said of the jurors. ''But they did.''  In the Old Fourth Ward of Atlanta, a block from Ebenezer Baptist Church, Rema Miller, 49, was sitting outside a cigar store having a celebratory puff.  ''I honestly feel some type of relief because we've been carrying a lot,'' Ms. Miller, a retired counselor, said. ''We felt like history was going to repeat itself. He was going to get convicted of the lesser charge. And so we've prepared ourselves for that.''  In some cities, people said they could not even bear to watch.  Tifanny Burks, 28, who organized protests last summer with the Black Lives Matter Alliance Broward in South Florida, said her mother texted the news to her about the guilty verdict on Tuesday afternoon.  ''This is a sign, a beacon of hope, that we're heading in the right direction,'' said Ms. Burks, who lives in Fort Lauderdale.  But she also said a verdict in a single case still meant only that -- one verdict.  ''The criminal justice system is really not going to provide accountability and the liberation that we're looking for,'' she said. ''We need police departments to be defunded. We need to defund the police department that failed George Floyd.''  In some communities, people spoke of relief that the verdict might avert the prospect of civil unrest, which was experienced by many cities in the wake of Mr. Floyd's death last year.  Lucy Putlak, who lives in suburban Highland Park, Ill., and works in Chicago, lamented the way downtown businesses had been boarded up pre-emptively.  ''How come every time there's a trial, we have to worry about riots, and we have this?'' she said, pointing to a hovering helicopter. ''OK, great, shut up, people. You got what you wanted.''  In New York, the announcement of the verdict was a burden lifted for some. At Washington Square Park in Manhattan, where most people appeared to have been drawn by the warm spring weather, a small crowd yelled ''Guilty!'' after the verdict was announced. Nearby, flowers ringed a makeshift memorial to Daunte Wright, a Black man who, like Mr. Floyd, was killed during an encounter with police officers in Minnesota.  Several blocks away at Union Square Park, Gurpreet Singh, 46, said he felt elated by the verdict. While nothing could bring Mr. Floyd back, Mr. Singh said, ''at least this one wrong has been righted.''  On the sidewalk in front of the county jail in downtown Portland, Ore., Cyncyrie Cruz, 32, got news of the verdict by way of a phone call from her boyfriend.  ''What is it? Tell me,'' Ms. Cruz asked as soon as she answered the call. She started pacing, then cheered and put her fist in the air.  But while Ms. Cruz said she was grateful for what she viewed as a step toward accountability, she also did not see the verdict as an end to a larger struggle for racial justice and against police brutality.  She said she was not hopeful that Mr. Chauvin's sentence, to be set at a later date, would be sufficient.  ''This isn't something that's just happening in Minneapolis, in Minnesota,'' Ms. Cruz said. ''This is the entire country.''  For some Americans who had closely followed the trial, the verdict was surprising -- different, they said, from what they had come to expect in cases involving the police.  Juan Carmona, the head of the social studies department at Donna High School in Donna, Texas, a town of 16,000 on the border with Mexico, said he had been listening to the trial on the radio. For him, a defining moment had come when the Minneapolis police chief testified for the prosecution, stating clearly that Mr. Chauvin's actions went against the department's training.  ''That blue wall of silence may be finally cracking,'' Mr. Carmona said. ''Police officers are like anybody else, and they're seeing what's happening in the country.''  In South Los Angeles, a celebration of the verdict broke out at the intersection of Florence and Normandie, a corner that erupted in fire and rage in 1992, after a jury acquitted four white police officers in the beating of Rodney King. It was at that corner that Reginald Denny, a white truck driver, was pulled from his vehicle and beaten amid the Los Angeles riots.  On Tuesday, the location had the feel of a mini-block party: Cars honked their horns and activists waved handwritten signs reading, ''Guilty.'' A few dozen Black, white and Hispanic men and women waved Black Lives Matter flags and placards as music blared from portable speakers.  As a fire truck passed through the intersection, its driver looked at an activist on the corner and blew her a kiss, prompting a cheer.  ''It's a celebration of the life of George Floyd, it's a celebration of the verdict and it's a celebration to understand that the system has finally held accountable people who have been so protected for so long,'' said Daymond Johnson, 40, a longtime community activist who is African-American and who stood at the corner holding a megaphone.  Shaila Dewan reported from Minneapolis, and Julie Bosman from Chicago. Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker from Portland, Ore., Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh, Richard Fausset from Atlanta, Patricia Mazzei from Miami, Simon Romero from Albuquerque, Robert Chiarito from Chicago, Sarah Maslin Nir and Anushka Patil from New York, Manny Fernandez from Los Angeles, Shawn Hubler from Sacramento, and Edgar Sandoval from San Antonio.  Shaila Dewan reported from Minneapolis, and Julie Bosman from Chicago. Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker from Portland, Ore., Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh, Richard Fausset from Atlanta, Patricia Mazzei from Miami, Simon Romero from Albuquerque, Robert Chiarito from Chicago, Sarah Maslin Nir and Anushka Patil from New York, Manny Fernandez from Los Angeles, Shawn Hubler from Sacramento, and Edgar Sandoval from San Antonio.  Reacting to the verdict at George Floyd Square in Minneapolis. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times) (A1); High school friends of Mr. Floyd listening to the verdict in Houston.; Ceci Munoz after hearing the verdict at a high school in Houston. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANNIE MULLIGAN FOR THE new_york_times); The Congressional Black Caucus at the Capitol after the verdict. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times) (A16); A band playing at George Floyd Square, top, after the verdict. In Minneapolis, people responded emotionally to the verdict -- including Courteney Ross, bottom, George Floyd's girlfriend, who testified at the trial. Right, Leon Lyons, 60, reacted to the verdict in George Floyd Square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times; AMR ALFIKY/THE new_york_times) (A16-A17); Children in Los Angeles making a statement on a sidewalk. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALLISON ZAUCHA FOR THE new_york_times); Near Barclays Center in Brooklyn, a man wiped away tears. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE new_york_times); New Yorkers celebrated the outcome in Times Square. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SIMBARASHE CHA FOR THE new_york_times) (A17)   Document NYTF000020210422eh4l0000a "
359		"    Corrections  308 words 21 April 2021   23     Corrections that appeared in print on Wednesday, April 21, 2021.  FRONT PAGE  An article on Friday about the trial of Derek Chauvin and his decision to invoke his Fifth Amendment privilege described incorrectly his posture seen on video as he knelt on George Floyd. His hands were resting on his thighs, not in his pockets.  NATIONAL  An article on Tuesday about migrants' nighttime crossings of the U.S.-Mexico border misidentified the person who slashed an inflatable boat as it neared the shore. It was a Texas state trooper, not a U.S. Border Patrol agent. The error was repeated in a photo caption.  BUSINESS  An article on Tuesday about an end to talks between Tribune Publishing and Newslight for a potential offer misstated the nature of the agreement made between Tribune and Alden Global Capital. It was binding, not nonbinding.  ARTS  An article on Tuesday about Catherine Russell and her performance in the play ''Perfect Crime'' misstated the date of the play's first performance. It was April 18, 1987, not April 14. The article also described incorrectly Ms. Russell's association with the building where the show is playing. She is the general manager, not the owner.  SCIENCE TIMES  An article on Tuesday about the science of climate change misidentified the authors of The Debunking Handbook. It was written by social scientists who study climate communication, not a team of climate scientists.  Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.  To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, please email nytnews@nytimes.com. To share feedback, please visit nytimes.com/readerfeedback.  Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com.  For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.  Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0005c "
360		"    Few Charges, Fewer Convictions: A Grim History of Police Violence  By Aidan Gardiner and Rebecca Halleck  2,838 words 21 April 2021   14     For many observers, the trial of Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer charged in George Floyd's death, has felt like the culmination of years of outrage and grief over police killings of Black people in America. Video of the arrest that led to Mr. Floyd's death inspired demonstrations that touched every corner of the country last summer, with protesters demanding justice for Mr. Floyd.  The Times reviewed dozens of similar cases in which encounters between Black people and police ended fatally. Though many cases prompted public outrage, that did not always translate to criminal indictments. In some cases, police officers were shown to have responded lawfully. In others, charges were dropped or plea agreements were reached. Some have resulted in civil settlements. But very few have resulted in convictions at trial.  These cases offer valuable points of comparison about what issues -- video evidence, drug use, whether the person who died was armed -- proved decisive in each outcome and what consequences, if any, officers faced. Even as the trial has unfolded, several events, including the killing of Daunte Wright just a few miles from Minneapolis, have provided a grim reminder that Mr. Floyd's death is one in a decades-long history of fatal encounters.  CHARGES ARE RARE  In many killings, the officers involved are never indicted, much less brought to trial, even when the victim was unarmed. Prosecutors charged Mr. Chauvin four days after his encounter with Mr. Floyd.  Eric Garner, Staten Island, 2014  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Garner was standing outside a store when officers, who believed he was selling cigarettes illegally, confronted him. Officer Daniel Pantaleo wrapped his arm around Mr. Garner's neck, forcing him to the ground as Mr. Garner told officers, ''I can't breathe.'' Officer Pantaleo testified to a grand jury that he had intended to use a maneuver he learned at the Police Academy and that he had tried to unhook himself when he heard Mr. Garner's pleas.  OUTCOME: A grand jury ruled that there was not enough evidence to indict Officer Pantaleo. Federal investigators also declined to bring charges.  Michael Brown, Ferguson, Mo., 2014  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Michael Brown, 18, was shot and killed by a Ferguson police officer, Darren Wilson. Mr. Wilson originally testified that he had been responding to a report of a ''stealing in progress'' at a convenience store when he encountered Mr. Brown and another person walking in the street and tried to block their path with his car. A scuffle ensued, followed by a foot chase that ended when Mr. Wilson shot an unarmed Mr. Brown several times.  OUTCOME: A grand jury declined to indict Mr. Wilson. A separate U.S. Department of Justice investigation did not result in charges. More than five years later, a St. Louis County prosecutor reopened the case but ultimately decided not to prosecute Mr. Wilson.  Tamir Rice, Cleveland, 2014  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Tamir, 12, was playing with a toy gun in a park when he was shot and killed by Officer Timothy Loehmann. A 911 caller reported seeing a person with a gun but said that it was ''probably fake'' and that the person was ''probably a juvenile.'' Surveillance video showed that Mr. Loehmann had opened fire on Tamir within two seconds of arriving on the scene.OUTCOME: Local prosecutors never pressed charges against Mr. Loehmann or his partner, Frank Garmback. A federal investigation that languished under two administrations also ended without charges.  Stephon Clark, Sacramento, 2018  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Clark was in his grandmother's backyard when Officers Terrence Mercadal and Jared Robinet, responding to a vandalism complaint, fatally shot him because they believed he was holding a gun. The police did not find any weapon but found a cellphone under his body.  OUTCOME: The officers believed that he was pointing a gun at them, according to the district attorney, who declined to charge them. State and federal prosecutors also declined to bring charges.  Breonna Taylor, Louisville, Ky., 2020  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Ms. Taylor was killed in her apartment during a botched raid by police officers who later said they had announced their presence, which most witnesses said they did not hear. When her door was broken down after midnight, her boyfriend shot at what he thought were intruders, striking one officer in the leg. In response, that officer and two others fired 32 shots toward the couple.  OUTCOME: Neither of the two officers who struck Ms. Taylor were indicted by a grand jury, which did indict a third officer on three counts of wanton endangerment for firing recklessly into her neighbor's apartment. There is an F.B.I. investigation into her death.  TRIALS AVOIDED  Charging police officers with a crime in a fatal encounter does not guarantee that they will face a trial jury. Prosecutors may drop charges if they believe their case is weak or if they reach an agreement with the defendant to avoid trial. In fact, Mr. Chauvin initially agreed to go to prison for at least 10 years in a plea deal, but the deal was scuttled by the Justice Department.  Sandra Bland, Prairie View, Texas, 2015  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Ms. Bland was found hanged in her jail cell three days after a Texas state trooper, Brian T. Encinia, arrested her during a traffic stop. In an affidavit justifying the arrest, Mr. Encinia said he had removed Ms. Bland from the car so he could safely investigate it. A grand jury ruled that claim false and indicted him on a perjury charge.  OUTCOME: Prosecutors dropped the charge after Mr. Encinia agreed to end his career in law enforcement.  Freddie Gray, Baltimore, 2015  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Gray died after sustaining a severe spinal cord injury in a police transport van. He had been handcuffed but not secured with a seatbelt. The state's attorney charged the six officers involved. In four trials, defense lawyers raised doubts about the narrative laid out by the prosecution and argued that there wasn't enough evidence to show that the officers had acted inappropriately.  OUTCOME: After failing to secure convictions at trials for the first four officers, the state's attorney later dropped the charges against the others. Federal prosecutors also declined to charge them.  VIDEO EVIDENCE  Videos captured by dashboard cameras, body-worn cameras and bystanders with cellphones have significantly changed the way police officers are prosecuted. In the Chauvin trial, the widely viewed bystander video is the central piece of evidence for the prosecution, whose experts analyzed it frame by frame.  Oscar Grant III, Oakland, Calif., 2009  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Grant was shot and killed by Officer Johannes Mehserle in Oakland, Calif. Dozens of bystanders watched and recorded as transit officers, who had been called to break up a fight, roughly detained several passengers. During the confusion, Mr. Mehserle fatally shot Mr. Grant in the back while he was being restrained by another officer. Mr. Mehserle would later say he meant to use his Taser, and not his gun, when he shot Mr. Grant -- a claim disputed by prosecutors. Bystander videos led to citywide protests and provided critical angles not captured by surveillance video or police cameras.  OUTCOME: Mr. Mehserle was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter and sentenced to 11 months in prison in 2010. Last year, a district attorney said she would reopen the case, focusing on a different officer, Anthony Pirone, after a 2019 report showed that he had punched Mr. Grant in the face and used a racial slur.  Walter Scott, North Charleston, S.C., 2015  FATAL ENCOUNTER: During a traffic stop over a broken taillight, Mr. Scott left his vehicle and began running away. Officer Michael T. Slager shot and killed him, initially claiming that the two had scuffled over a Taser. But a bystander video showed Mr. Slager shooting an unarmed Mr. Scott in the back from 17 feet away and then planting his own Taser next to Mr. Scott's body.  OUTCOME: Mr. Slager was tried on a murder charge in state court, but the jury was unable to decide whether he should be acquitted, convicted of murder or found guilty of voluntary manslaughter, and a mistrial was declared. Mr. Slager's defense team later worked out a plea deal to settle all state and federal charges against him, but the plea agreement left it up to a judge to decide if Mr. Slager was guilty of second-degree murder or voluntary manslaughter. The judge ultimately found Mr. Slager guilty of second-degree murder and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.  ARMED OR NOT  Many investigations of police killings hinge on whether the person killed had been armed, or whether the officer had reason to believe he was armed, a judgment that officers say they have only a split second to make. That's not a factor in the Chauvin trial -- Mr. Floyd was unarmed, and there was never any contention that he had a weapon.  Sean Bell, Queens, 2006  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Bell was with friends during his bachelor party the night before his wedding when detectives fired at the car they were in, killing Mr. Bell and wounding others. At trial, witnesses testified that they had heard a gun mentioned in an argument involving Mr. Bell. The detectives argued that they had believed they had to intervene to prevent a drive-by shooting. Investigators did not find any guns afterward.  OUTCOME: A judge acquitted the detectives involved, saying they had made a ''fair and just decision'' based on a reasonable fear that someone was armed. Federal prosecutors also declined to charge them.  Akai Gurley, Brooklyn, 2014  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Gurley was unarmed and in the stairwell of a public housing complex when Officer Peter Liang entered it with his gun drawn. Mr. Liang's gun went off, and the bullet ricocheted off a wall and struck Mr. Gurley, killing him. Mr. Liang said he had accidentally discharged his weapon. Prosecutors argued that Mr. Liang had been reckless in having his weapon drawn and that he had not done enough to save Mr. Gurley's life.OUTCOME: A jury convicted Mr. Liang of manslaughter.  DRUG USE  When drugs or alcohol are present, defense teams and police departments may cite them as a contributing cause of death or point to resulting erratic behavior as a justification for using deadly force. Mr. Chauvin's lawyer, Eric J. Nelson, has repeatedly asserted that Mr. Floyd's death was caused by a combination of drug use and an underlying medical condition.  Terence Crutcher, Tulsa, Okla., 2016  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Crutcher was standing in the street next to his S.U.V. when the police approached him. He raised his hands but walked away from them, even after they told him to stop. Officer Betty Jo Shelby fired a single shot, fatally striking Mr. Crutcher in the chest. The police said Mr. Crutcher had been talking nonsensically and was not complying with officers' demands. A vial of PCP was found in his vehicle, and an autopsy found that the drug was in his system at the time of his death.  OUTCOME: In her trial on manslaughter charges, Officer Shelby testified that she had seen Mr. Crutcher reach into the S.U.V. and that she had been trained to consider that a move to grab a weapon. A jury acquitted her.  Daniel Prude, Rochester, N.Y., 2020  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Prude was experiencing a psychotic episode when he ran out of his brother's Rochester home. When officers arrived, they placed Mr. Prude, who was naked and high on PCP, in a ''spit hood'' and pinned him to the pavement for at least two minutes until he became unresponsive. Mr. Prude was taken to a hospital, where he died seven days later.  OUTCOME: Though the medical examiner ruled his death a homicide, a grand jury declined to indict any of the seven officers involved. The officers were suspended five months after Mr. Prude's death.  OTHER OFFICERS' TESTIMONY  Rebuking a fellow officer is rare. Police unions and top officials are often loath to speak out against one of their own. One of the most damning pieces of witness testimony against Mr. Chauvin came from the Minneapolis police chief, Medaria Arradondo, who said Mr. Chauvin had ''absolutely'' violated department policies on the use of force, de-escalation and the duty to render aid.  Laquan McDonald, Chicago, 2014  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Laquan, 17, was shot 16 times by Officer Jason Van Dyke. Mr. Van Dyke's fellow officers initially backed his claim that Laquan, who was armed with a knife, had lunged menacingly toward police. The officers' version of events was later disproved by dashboard camera video that showed Laquan had been walking away from officers when he was killed.  OUTCOME: Mr. Van Dyke was convicted of second-degree murder and sentenced to nearly seven years in prison. Three other officers were tried and acquitted on charges that they had conspired to protect Mr. Van Dyke. The case also prompted a federal investigation into to the Chicago Police Department that found that officers routinely violated civil rights and operated under a ''code of silence'' to protect one another.  Philando Castile, St. Anthony, Minn., 2016  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Castile was shot and killed by Officer Jeronimo Yanez during a traffic stop. During Mr. Yanez's trial on charges of second-degree manslaughter and endangering safety by discharging a firearm, his defense relied heavily on the testimony of fellow officers, who argued that Mr. Yanez had reacted reasonably when Mr. Castile disclosed that he had a firearm in the vehicle.OUTCOME: The St. Anthony police chief, Jon Mangseth, said Mr. Yanez's actions were consistent with his department's policies and training. Mr. Yanez was acquitted and cleared of all charges.  THE HEAT OF THE MOMENT  Courts have generally accepted the argument that the police need to make difficult, quick decisions while responding to perceived threats. In Mr. Chauvin's trial, prosecutors have argued that the defendant had ample time to change how he was subduing Mr. Floyd but did not, even after it was clear that Mr. Floyd had stopped moving.  John Crawford III, Beavercreek, Ohio, 2014  INCIDENT: Mr. Crawford picked up an unwrapped, unloaded air rifle while shopping at Walmart. Another shopper called 911 to report a suspicious man with a gun. Officer Sean Williams fatally shot Mr. Crawford in the store within seconds of seeing him holding the fake gun.  OUTCOME: The officers at the time believed they were responding to what could have turned into a mass shooting, the special prosecutor for the case said. A local grand jury declined to indict Officer Williams in 2014. A federal grand jury did the same in 2017.  Sylville K. Smith, Milwaukee, 2016  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. Smith was fatally shot about 12 seconds after the police confronted him and another man in a car about a suspected drug deal. The two men tried to run away. Mr. Smith tossed his gun over a fence and was trying to climb over it when Officer Dominique Heaggan-Brown shot him. The officer fired again once Mr. Smith had landed on the ground.  OUTCOME: Mr. Heaggan-Brown was charged with reckless homicide, but his defense argued that he had followed his training. A jury acquitted Mr. Heaggan-Brown in Mr. Smith's killing, but he was later convicted on unrelated charges.  A DEADLOCKED JURY  Even when, as in the death of Mr. Floyd, much of the public views a killing as not justified and prosecutors believe they have strong evidence to prove that, the outcome is far from certain. Even when prosecutors sway some jurors, others may have remained unconvinced, which has led to mistrials. Prosecutors can sometimes secure convictions in subsequent trials.  Samuel DuBose, Cincinnati, 2015  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Mr. DuBose was driving without a front license plate when Raymond M. Tensing, a University of Cincinnati police officer, stopped him. As the officer questioned him, the car began to roll forward. Officer Tensing shot Mr. DuBose in the head. The officer claimed that he felt that the car was dragging him and that he feared he would be run over.  OUTCOME: Jurors couldn't agree that Mr. Tensing had intended to kill Mr. DuBose or that he had acted out of rage or passion, so the judge declared a mistrial. A jury deadlocked in a second trial, and prosecutors dropped the case.  Damon Grimes, Detroit, 2017  FATAL ENCOUNTER: Damon, 15, was illegally riding an all-terrain vehicle when state troopers tried to stop him. As Damon disregarded their orders and kept riding ahead, Trooper Mark Bessner shot Damon with Taser darts from the passenger window, sending him careening into a parked truck. Damon, who was unarmed, died shortly afterward.  OUTCOME: Mr. Bessner was charged with murder but testified that he had thought Damon was reaching for a gun. The jury deadlocked; a second trial ended in his conviction on manslaughter charges.  Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0005i "
361		"    Covid-19 Exposure Risk in the United States by County  86 words 21 April 2021   4     About 66 percent of people nationwide live in counties with a very high or extremely high risk of exposure to Covid-19, according to an analysis of coronavirus case and testing data by The new_york_times and public health experts. This map shows the current exposure risk level for each county. For information about every county and a full description of suggested activities at each risk level, go to nytimes.com/covidrisk  Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0005h "
362		"    As Nike's Deal With Bryant Expires, Reverberations Could Be Immense  By Kevin Draper  1,374 words 21 April 2021   10     The end of the deal has no analogue in basketball or sneaker history, opening a hole in the market as Bryant's shoes have been used heavily by N.B.A. athletes and have seen high demand among the public since his death.  The most popular shoes on the N.B.A. hardwood for the last several seasons were not the signature sneakers endorsed by the top active players, like Nike's LeBron James or Adidas's Damian Lillard. They were not the shoes endorsed by the man who practically invented the modern sneaker game, Michael Jordan.  Instead they were Nike's line of Kobe Bryant's signature sneakers, which were worn by 103 players last season -- about 20 percent of the league's players -- according to the sneaker website Baller Shoes DB. Many W.N.B.A. players, like the Seattle Storm's Jewell Loyd, also wear Bryant's signature sneakers.  But soon those players will need to find new shoes, at least if they want to play in brand-new pairs. Nike confirmed Monday that its contract with the estate of Bryant, who died in a helicopter crash last year, expired last week.  ''Kobe Bryant was an important part of Nike's deep connection to consumers,'' a Nike spokesman, Josh Benedek, said in a statement. ''He pushed us and made everyone around him better. Though our contractual relationship has ended, he remains a deeply loved member of the Nike family.''  In the uncertainty over Bryant's continued endorsement deal for basketball shoes and apparel, a number of issues collide: what professional basketball players wear on the court, the demand from consumers for Bryant merchandise and how a person's name and image are used, even after their death.  Nike has a short window in which it can continue selling the shoes and apparel featuring Bryant that it has already manufactured, but soon that merchandise will disappear from Nike's website and store shelves.  Switching shoe companies is not uncommon for top basketball players, whose sneaker contracts can pay tens of millions of dollars annually and rival or even exceed their N.B.A. contracts in value. Bryant signed with Adidas before he entered the N.B.A., in 1996, then signed with Nike in 2003 after his Adidas deal ended. Even as some major sponsors dropped Bryant when he was accused of sexual assault, Nike, which had signed Bryant shortly before he was arrested, stood by him.  The current situation with Bryant's estate has no analogue in basketball or sneaker history. Signature basketball shoes really only began to gain prominence in the late 1980s, and barely any N.B.A. superstars from that era or later have died, let alone at a young age like Bryant, who was 41.  The closest comparisons are perhaps Chuck Taylor, the namesake of Converse's famed Chuck Taylor All-Stars, whose shoes remain popular 50 years after his death, or Maya Moore, the W.N.B.A. star and Jordan Brand endorser, who has sat out the past few seasons to focus on social justice. But the strained analogies suggest the past provides little hint of what will happen next.  Almost all N.B.A. players are endorsed by one sneaker company or another. But only a handful have lines of shoes named after them, fewer have popular lines that sell tens or hundreds of millions of dollars worth of merchandise annually and even fewer stay popular in retirement. In the 1990s, a handful of W.N.B.A. stars had shoe deals, including Sheryl Swoopes, who was the first female athlete to have a signature basketball sneaker.  Nike clearly believed that Bryant's appeal extended into retirement, signing him to a new five-year agreement on the day of his final N.B.A. game: April 13, 2016. Bryant played his final season in the Kobe 11s, the 11th edition of his sneaker line. After his retirement, Nike released a new line of sneakers styled as Kobe A.D., or anno Domini, the Latin phrase that means ''in the year of the Lord.''  Nike's Jordan brand, and its continued release of Air Jordan sneakers, remains quite popular, but as everyday fashion shoes; N.B.A. players rarely wear Air Jordans during games these days. Bryant attempted to buck that trend in retirement, with Nike releasing Bryant ''protro'' shoes: retro Bryant shoes updated with modern professional performance features.  While they were popular with basketball players, Bryant's sneakers were not always the most popular off the court, worn with jeans or sweats.  Before Bryant's death, the market for his shoes was fairly niche, said Chad Jones, the co-founder of Another Lane, a marketplace for sneaker collectors. ''Performance wise, a lot of performance athletes loved Kobe shoes, but fashion wise is really the predictor for how well it will sell to the masses,'' Jones said.  Nike did not sign Bryant to what is effectively a lifetime contract, like it has done with Jordan and James, raising questions about how much continued value it saw in his name. The Kobe shoes N.B.A. players wore were often limited editions or unique colors that average consumers could not buy, partly explaining why their popularity on the court did not necessarily translate to popularity on the street.  Since Bryant's death, Nike has released new Bryant merchandise, but mostly in limited quantities through its SNKRS app. The shoes have sold out almost immediately, and then showed up for much higher prices on resale markets, leading to accusations that Nike was allowing resellers to profit from Bryant's death.  ''When people don't get them on retail, but on a resale platform for five times or two times the price, they are upset,'' Jones said.  In a statement posted to Instagram on Monday night, Vanessa Bryant, Kobe's widow, wrote that she was ''hoping to forge a lifelong partnership with Nike that reflects my husband's legacy,'' and hinted that she will find a way to continue to sell Bryant's products, perhaps in greater quantities.  ''My hope will always be to allow Kobe's fans to get and wear his products,'' she wrote. ''Kobe's products sell out in seconds. That says everything.''  If Vanessa Bryant cannot come to an agreement with Nike on a new contract, building a new brand around Kobe could be a challenge. Nike, including brands it owns like Jordan Brand and Converse, controls more than half the sneaker market, with companies like Adidas and Puma as distant competitors. Under Armour, which is endorsed by Golden State's Stephen Curry, has struggled to break through.  Many sneakers are promoted through elaborate back stories about how the player inspired specific design details or guided the design process, and through player-focused advertising campaigns.  But what really sells sneakers is players' connection to culture, or the feelings they evoke in potential consumers, not necessarily winning N.B.A. championships or a shoe's performance features. Allen Iverson's rebellious, me-against-the-world persona made his ''Answer'' shoes from Reebok popular sellers in the 2000s, even though he never won an N.B.A. title.  Bryant was not always a popular player, and his early shoes were not top sellers. Through repeated trips to China and success in the Olympics he found fame outside of America's borders, and as he aged a generation of players entered an N.B.A. that revered him.  If the year since his death has shown anything, it is that even into retirement Bryant's popularity was growing as he made new connections in Hollywood, opened a sports academy and became a prominent and vocal supporter of women's basketball.  After Kobe Bryant's death in January 2020, memorial messages appeared on shoes worn by, from left, a University of Mississippi player and the N.B.A. players Keita Bates-Diop and Christian Woods. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY THOMAS GRANING/ASSOCIATED PRESS; CRAIG LASSIG/ASSOCIATED PRESS; CARLOS OSORIO/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Bryant retired in 2016, but his signature sneakers are the most popular among N.B.A. players. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRANIMIR KVARTUC/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0005f "
363		"    'You Are In or You Are Out,' FIFA Tells Super League Clubs  By Tariq Panja  1,320 words 21 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     As opposition mounts to a breakaway European league, Paris St.-Germain opted out and an Italian team president called a rival backing the plan ''a Judas.''  Either you are in, or you are out.  The president of world soccer's governing body, FIFA, delivered a short but powerful message on Tuesday to the dozen rich and powerful European clubs whose planned breakaway Super League has threatened to upend the decades-old structures that underpin the world's most powerful sport.  ''If some elect to go their own way then they must live with the consequences of their choice, they are responsible for their choice,'' the FIFA president, Gianni Infantino, said in an address to European soccer leaders at their congress in Montreux, Switzerland. ''Concretely this means, either you are in, or you are out. You cannot be half in and half out. This has to be absolutely clear.''  Infantino's intervention came amid mounting fury against a proposed European Super League that has turned the sports project into a national emergency in the three countries -- England, Spain and Italy -- that are home to its 12 founding members.  In Britain, which is providing half of the breakaway group's members, Prime Minister Boris Johnson met Tuesday with fan representatives and leaders of the Premier League. Later, his office pledged to do whatever it took to stop the multibillion-dollar competition from proceeding, vowing that nothing was off the table.  ''We are exploring a range of options, including legislative ones,'' said Max Blain, Johnson's spokesman.  The comments came as the French champion, Paris St.-Germain, joined the growing list of elite clubs who have said they will not take part in the new league. Instead, Nasser al-Khelaifi, the P.S.G. chairman, pledged his support to UEFA and its existing Champions League, the event that has been European soccer's elite competition for more than half a century.  ''We believe that any proposal without the support of UEFA -- an organization that has been working to progress the interests of European football for nearly 70 years -- does not resolve the issues currently facing the football community, but is instead driven by self-interest,'' he said.  Al-Khelaifi's disavowal came after similar ones on Monday by the leaders of Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund, two German powerhouses that had been seen as candidates to complete the Super League's permanent membership of 15 teams. The Dutch club Ajax Amsterdam, a four-time European champion, also said it would not take part.  The backlash to the proposal has been withering and widespread, with advocates for the tournament increasingly hard to find. Even figures associated with the teams that have signed up to the project -- which is being backed by the American investment bank JPMorgan Chase -- have expressed their disappointment.  ''It is not a sport when the relationship between the effort and the success, the effort and the reward doesn't exist,'' said Pep Guardiola, the decorated coach of Manchester City, one of the Super League's founding members. ''It is not a sport if success is already guaranteed. It is not a sport if it doesn't matter if you lose.''  Jürgen Klopp, the German coach of the English champion Liverpool and a longtime opponent of the type of closed competition his club has agreed to support, said he would be speaking with the team's American owners about the plan. By Tuesday morning, Klopp, who is hugely popular in England after leading Liverpool to domestic and European titles in the last two years, became the favorite among oddsmakers to be the next coach to leave a Premier League club.  In London, Chelsea fans marched in the streets before their team's Premier League match against Brighton to protest their club's plan to join the breakaway league.  Privately some of the clubs involved in the project have expressed frustration about how it has been presented. A statement to announce a league that its backers said would ''open a new chapter for European football'' came late on Sunday as much of Europe slept.  But after the teams involved made almost no public comments, the Real Madrid president Florentino Pérez, the only executive involved in the scheme to defend it publicly, was left to defend it alone on a chat show that was broadcast at midnight Monday in Spain.  Pérez, the chairman of the new league and one of its leading proponents behind the scenes, insisted the project would benefit all of soccer, which he said was at risk of economic collapse because of the global pandemic. He did not address why so many of the clubs that have signed up to the new league had been so badly mismanaged before the pandemic struck, or make a persuasive case for how funneling billions of dollars in television and sponsorship revenue to a handful of top clubs would filter down to the leagues and teams that will be left out.  Many of those teams fear an immediate loss of value for their own teams and leagues, and possibly financial ruin. Fans, meanwhile, have railed against what they see as a cash grab by a few rich clubs that threatens to destroy century-old rivalries and beloved domestic leagues.  ''Whenever there is a change, there are always people who oppose it,'' Pérez said on the Spanish soccer show ''El Chiringuito de Jugones.'' ''We are doing this to save football at this critical moment.''  Pérez also contended that the competition would serve the wider soccer economy by spending money on talent, essentially arguing that those excluded would act as feeder teams for the far richer Super League clubs. An additional annual ''solidarity'' payment of 400 million euros -- almost $500 million -- would also be provided to the have-nots, he said. That amount would offset some of the billions lost through the devaluation of domestic and international television rights that other competitions would suffer as a result of the new tournament, though most experts argue the financial costs could be far higher for those on the outside.  Despite the backlash, however, the Super League's backers are forging ahead. Their lawyers already have filed motions in courts across Europe to ensure their efforts cannot be stymied. A commercial court in Spain, where the company created to run the Super League is based, issued a ruling Tuesday in the group's favor. It prohibited FIFA, UEFA and national federations from adopting ''any measure that prohibits, restricts, limits or conditions in any way'' the creation of the new competition.  But the secrecy with which they have worked has infuriated their putative partners in the game.  England's Premier League, meanwhile, held a meeting on Tuesday without the six Super League teams, and finished it by threatening to sanction the rebels.  ''The 14 clubs at the meeting unanimously and vigorously rejected the plans for the competition,'' the league said in a statement. ''The Premier League is considering all actions available to prevent it from progressing, as well as holding those shareholders involved to account under its rules.''  In Italy, matters became even more fractious. On a conference call late Monday, team owners and executives turned on officials from Italy's three Super League members -- A.C. Milan, Inter Milan and Juventus.  The Torino president Urbano Cairo branded Agnelli a ''Judas'' for what many perceived as his disingenuous behavior in negotiations with UEFA about revisions to the Champions League. Agnelli is said to have used an expletive to say he did not care if Juventus remained in Serie A, according to a person present in the meeting.  ''It's a betrayal,'' Cairo said. ''It's what a Judas does.''  FIFA's president, Gianni Infantino, addressed the UEFA congress on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Richard Juilliart/UEFA, via Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004u "
364		"    Artists Navigate a Brexit-Pandemic Nexus  By Raphael Minder  1,332 words 21 April 2021   2     A production of Benjamin Britten's opera at the Teatro Real in Madrid highlights the difficult new conditions for British artists working in the European Union.  MADRID -- In a new production of ''Peter Grimes'' that premiered at the Teatro Real opera house here on Monday, the people of an English seaside town wave the British flag, and pack into a pub seeking shelter from a sudden downpour.  Benjamin Britten's 1945 opera about an ill-fated fisherman is one of the most quintessentially English works in the opera repertoire, but Britain's recent exit from the European Union, coupled with a travel ban and other restrictions triggered by the coronavirus pandemic, has made staging it in Madrid a journey across choppy and uncharted waters.  ''Having to deal with Brexit and the pandemic at the same time was diabolical,'' Joan Matabosch, the artistic director of the Teatro Real, said in an interview.  The show is a coproduction with three other theaters, including the Royal Opera House in London, where it is scheduled to play next March, and 17 people had to travel from Britain to Madrid for rehearsals and performances. Almost all the production's lead singers are British, as is its director, Deborah Warner.  Until Jan. 1, while Britain was in a transition period after its departure from the European Union, British performers could work throughout the bloc without visas. Since then, they have to apply country by country for entry visas and short-stay work permits. Each E.U. member state has set its own requirements, making it even more complex for artists who want to tour the continent.  Rehearsals in Madrid started two weeks late, because of difficulties getting visas and a travel ban introduced after a new variant of the coronavirus was identified in England late last year. The performance schedule had to be shortened by one show, with fewer rest days, to allow the British members of the cast to leave Spain within the 90-day limit of their visas. Gregorio Marañón, the Teatro Real's president, said that he personally spoke with three Spanish ministers to help with the paperwork required for the British visitors.  Matabosch said that many of the production's difficulties arose ''because nobody really seemed to know how the new Brexit rules applied. So we had some people who had to make three attempts to reach Madrid, but at least finally everybody got here.''  Opera productions are planned well in advance. Four years ago, when the Teatro Real decided to schedule ''Peter Grimes'' for 2021, Britain had recently voted in a referendum to leave the European Union, ''but nobody imagined it would take so long for Brexit to actually happen,'' Matabosch said.  Negotiations between the British government and the European Union dragged on because Brussels did not want Britain to cherry-pick benefits that apply to its member states while freeing itself of membership obligations. Even after an overall deal was completed, the specifics of many issues were left unresolved, including how travel visas would work for artists.  In Britain, a parliamentary inquiry is underway, spurred by a chorus of criticism about the post-Brexit situation for performers, with complaints from major pop stars like Elton John and Dua Lipa. In February, Britain's culture minister, Oliver Dowden, blamed Brussels for rejecting a British proposal to grant British artists eased access to the 27 remaining E.U. nations. ''It is worth noting that what we put forward was what the music industry had asked for,'' Mr. Dowden argued before Parliament. But Michel Barnier, Brussels' chief negotiator, has insisted that it was London that rejected last year an E.U. offer to agree special terms for traveling musicians and other artists.  Warner was scathing about the lack of a deal for British artists, saying that the production's visa problems were the result of ''the scandalous negligence of the U.K. negotiators who have failed utterly the music world.''  Spain was among the countries worst hit at the start of the pandemic, when hospitals in Madrid overflowed with Covid-19 patients. But after a national state of emergency was lifted last summer, Madrid's opera house reopened, alongside many other theaters across Spain.  Since then, the regional authorities governing Madrid have kept Spain's capital among the most bustling cities in Europe, even though the number of coronavirus cases has recently been creeping up again. While the Teatro Real had to cancel some ballet and orchestra shows, it has staged several operas successfully.  The opera house said it had spent about 240,000 -- nearly $290,000 -- on regularly testing employees and guest workers and that around 20 had to go into self-isolation last month, including cast members for ''Peter Grimes.''  In an interview before Monday's opening night, Warner, the director, said: ''I had my doubts about how likely this was, and, at certain moments before I got here, how wise this was.'' She said she felt ''there was a craziness'' to the Teatro Real's plan to stage ''Peter Grimes,'' which is about a close-knit community and could not be done with social distancing onstage.  But looking back, she also said that key themes in Britten's ''shocking opera,'' including its references to English nationalism, resonated with ''the stress of these times.''  In Madrid, the British singers welcomed the chance to perform in a major ''Peter Grimes'' production involving about 150 artists, at a time when most opera houses in Europe and the United States are closed, but they also sounded anxious about what would come afterward.  James Gilchrist, who sings the part of a priest in Britten's opera, said that 90 percent of his work had been in the European Union rather than in Britain, which made him worried not only about his own future but also the prospects for younger artists. ''If you are a promoter in Frankfurt or somewhere like that, you are not going to want to put a British artist at the top of your list, because it is just such a hassle,'' he said.  ''For very well-established artists, that is probably less of a problem because their name on the poster will bring people in, but if you are more at the beginning of your career, I think this is going to be very, very hard.''  Matabosch said the Teatro Real was committed to having the best possible lineups, irrespective of nationality. He forecast that the post-Brexit travel rules would become easier to navigate, but he acknowledged that British performers risked losing substitution work, which is an important part of their incomes.  ''I'm sure that we will end up knowing exactly how to bring over a British singer, just as people also come here from Australia or Canada. But the problem is that if you need a last-minute replacement and have to fly somebody over that very morning, this is not really doable from Britain at the moment,'' Matabosch said.  Another British member of the ''Peter Grimes'' cast, John Graham-Hall, thanked the Teatro Real for helping overcome travel hurdles that left him with ''the very nasty feeling that the British government does not care about the arts.'' He also gave a succinct summary of the twin hurdles raised by Brexit and the pandemic: ''It's a bloody nightmare.''  Alex Marshall contributed reporting from London  Alex Marshall contributed reporting from London  From top: The auditorium of the Teatro Real opera house at the ''Peter Grimes' premiere on Monday in Madrid; above center, Deborah Warner, the production's director; Joan Matabosch, the artistic director of the Teatro Real.; From top right: The ''Peter Grimes'' production at the Teatro Real; ushers at the theater are taking extra safety precautions; the Teatro Real, one of the few opera houses in Europe that is still staging work during the pandemic. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY EMILIO PARRA DOIZTUA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004n "
365		"    Police Shooting in Columbus Leaves Black Girl, 15, Dead  By Neil Vigdor and Bryan Pietsch  1,036 words 21 April 2021   20     The police in Ohio, who released body camera footage, said the girl had threatened two other girls with a knife before an officer opened fire.  A teenage girl who the police say threatened two girls with a knife was fatally shot by an officer in Columbus, Ohio, on Tuesday afternoon, shortly before a jury reached a guilty verdict in the murder trial of the former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin in last year's killing of George Floyd.  The girl's death cast an immediate pall over public expressions that justice had been served in Mr. Floyd's case and touched off protests in Ohio's capital city.  At a news conference on Tuesday night, the Columbus Division of Police released body camera footage from the officer, who officials said had been responding to a 911 call about an attempted stabbing around 4:45 p.m. in the southeastern part of the city.  Officials said the video showed the teenager lunging at two other females with a knife as the officer arrived at the driveway of a residence. The officer then fired several times -- four shots could be heard in the video -- at the girl. She collapsed to the ground next to a car that had been parked in the driveway, where the body camera footage showed a knife on the ground.  The girl who was killed was identified as Ma'Khia Bryant, 16, by a spokeswoman for Franklin County Children's Services, who said in an email on Tuesday night that Ma'Khia had been in foster care.  ''No matter what the circumstances, that family is in agony and they are in my prayers,'' Ned Pettus Jr., the public safety director for the city of Columbus, said during the news conference. ''They deserve answers. Our city deserves answers. I want answers, but fast, quick answers cannot come at the cost of accurate answers.''  The name of the officer, who officials said has been taken off the street while the shooting is investigated, was not released. The Ohio Bureau of Criminal Investigation will conduct an independent inquiry, which local officials said is standard whenever an officer shoots someone.  Earlier on Tuesday night on Twitter, Mayor Andrew Ginther of Columbus urged residents to keep the peace as protesters descended on the scene.  ''This afternoon a young woman tragically lost her life,'' Mr. Ginther said. ''We do not know all of the details. There is body-worn camera footage of the incident. We are working to review it as soon as possible.''  A woman interviewed by The Columbus Dispatch identified the victim, who was Black, as her teenage niece. The woman, Hazel Bryant, told the newspaper that her niece lived in a foster home and got into an altercation with someone else at the home.  Rayshawn Whiting said in an interview on Tuesday night that he was at his brother's house just a few blocks away from where the shooting took place to watch the Chauvin verdict when he heard gunshots. When he saw on social media what was going on, he walked down the street to join the throng of protesters who reached between 150 and 200 people at their peak.  ''I've got daughters,'' he said. ''And I'm tired of it. I feel like a polar bear with the ice caps melting. We have nowhere to run. If we protect ourselves, we go to jail. If we don't, we die.''  Chris Roberts said in an interview that he was in his backyard with his twin daughters when he heard the gunshots from just a few yards away. He said they ran in the house and called 911. Since the shooting, he said, his daughters did not want to be alone.  ''How do I teach my daughters when you call for help, and you expect help to come, you could be on the other side of the gun?'' he said.  A crowd of protesters gathered outside the city's police building, local news media reported.  The teenager's death quickly received widespread attention, including from Ben Crump, the Floyd family's lawyer, amid a continuing reckoning over police accountability and systemic racism.  ''As we breathed a collective sigh of relief today, a community in Columbus felt the sting of another police shooting'' Mr. Crump said. ''Another child lost! Another hashtag.''  Earlier Tuesday night, when members of the Columbus City Council were discussing the need for a civilian review board for police accountability, Shannon Hardin, the council's president, addressed the shooting.  ''As we watched the verdict from Minneapolis many talked about a sigh of relief, but there is a truth that for so many in our community there is no relief,'' Mr. Hardin said. ''This is not right. It's not OK, and it can't continue on.''  Michael Woods, the interim police chief of Columbus, said at the news conference later Tuesday night that it was unprecedented in the city for body camera footage to be released so quickly after a shooting by an officer.  ''We wanted to get that out as soon as possible,'' he said.  Columbus has been gripped by tension over police shootings since early December, when Casey Goodson Jr., 23, was shot to death at the entrance of his home by a Franklin County sheriff's deputy assigned to a fugitive task force.  Members of the task force had been in the area looking for someone in an operation that had nothing to do with Mr. Goodson.  Two weeks later, Andre Hill, 47, was shot four times by a Columbus police officer who was responding to a call about a suspicious vehicle. When officers arrived to investigate, they encountered Mr. Hill, and one of the officers, Adam Coy, a 19-year veteran, opened fire within seconds. Mr. Coy, who was fired after the shooting, was charged with felony murder in the case.  Lucia Walinchus and Lew Serviss contributed reporting, and Jack Begg contributed research.  Hazel Bryant, left, learned that her niece was killed on Tuesday in Columbus, Ohio. The mayor said there was body camera footage. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GAELEN MORSE/REUTERS)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00054 "
366		"    Where to Make Up for Lost Time  By Pete Wells  3,041 words 21 April 2021   7     As spring takes hold, the sidewalks of New York are filling with people. Their bodies are loaded with vaccine-induced antibodies, and their heads are throbbing with an urge to enjoy city life again. The restaurant business staggered, but never stopped, and if you spent the past year cooking at home you'd be surprised how many new places have sprung up. Here are some of my favorites, all opened during or just before the pandemic, and all offering outdoor seating. I reviewed five of them last year, when I wasn't convinced anyone was paying attention. The others I checked out and enjoyed, but decided to save in my back pocket for the right moment. Here they are now.  AweSum DimSum  If you have fixed ideas about how a dim sum restaurant should look -- waiters trundling steel carts between round tables big enough to seat the Yankees' starting lineup, and so on -- forget them. AweSum DimSum is trying to fast-casualize the genre. You order your har gow and siu mai at a counter in the back of the concrete-and-blond-wood dining area. Then you carry your tray, stacked with bamboo steamer baskets, to one of the small tables nearby or outside on 23rd Street. Each basket is big enough to hold three or four dumplings, their fillings showing through the taut, translucent wrappers like saltwater taffy. The rest of the menu isn't as awesome, but the dumplings are small marvels that outclass the ones at some celebrated Chinatown banquet halls.  160 East 23rd Street (Third Avenue), Flatiron district; 646-998-3313; awesumdimsum.us.  Ayat  Although the graffiti-style sign over the door advertises ''Palestinian Street Food,'' there is more riveting hummus and falafel elsewhere in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, like the superb Al-Aqsa Bakery & Restaurant on Fifth Avenue. Where Ayat excels is in the more complicated dishes of the Levantine home-cooking canon. Kousa are small Persian squash hollowed out and filled up again with rice and onions. Mussakhan piles sumac chicken and fried onions over a pillow of bread that serves as a plate and then as a second course. Mansaf is a deep-dish amalgam of yellow rice, lamb stew, toasted almonds and spiced saj, a crepe-thin flatbread made over a domed griddle in the front window. All the meat is halal and comes from small regional farms that also supply an eastern Mediterranean grocery store across the street that shares an owner with Ayat.  8504 Third Avenue (86th Street), Bay Ridge, Brooklyn; 718-831-2585; facebook.com/ayat.nyc.  Bar Marseille  Restaurants on the Rockaway Peninsula are generally divided into longstanding taverns lighted by neon beer logos where locals in baseball caps talk about boats, and scruffy new establishments where day trippers in board shorts talk about coffee grinders. Bar Marseille is something else, a vaguely Provençal date-night venue at the foot of a high-end apartment building. The menu bounces between stuff you might actually find on the Côte d'Azur, like bouillabaisse, Pastis-scented mussels and olive tapenade, and resort food like tuna burgers. But the cold French whites and rosés are authentic enough, the grilled oysters in warm pools of seaweed butter slide down easily, and the sprawling patio is dotted with propane heaters in case there's a chilly evening breeze rolling off the Atlantic, a block away.  190 Beach 69th Street (Rockaway Beach Boulevard), Arverne, Queens; 718-513-2474; barmarseille.com.  Bilao  What was meant to be a tiny, all-day Filipino canteen became an al fresco Filipino party after Bilao took advantage of outdoor-dining rules to annex the sidewalk and pitch a picnic tent on First Avenue. Granted, it is a particular kind of al fresco party, one at which a noticeable subset of the guests are dressed in medical scrubs. The bet was that the location, and a kitchen versed in the classics, would help lure the many health care workers from the Philippines who work in hospitals on the Upper East Side, and they were right. Like a diner, Bilao will make anything on the menu at any time of day. If you want sizzling sisig, a hash of pig parts on a searing-hot plate, first thing in the morning, you've come to the right place. If it's getting dark and you want stubby longaniza sausages or sweet, cherry-red cured pork belly with sunnyside-up eggs and a heap of garlic-fried rice, Bilao is ready for you, too.  1437 First Avenue (75th Street), Upper East Side; 212-650-0010; bilaonyc.com.  Blue Willow  The arrival of a new Hunanese restaurant in New York is always worth noting, but Blue Willow's appearance in Midtown just before the pandemic was an event. The restaurant is in the hands of the same owner and the same chef as Hunan Cafe in Flushing, Queens, formerly Hunan House, which for at least a decade has been the city's finest practitioner of the eye-wateringly pungent cuisine of the Hunan province. They gave their Manhattan outpost an intimate, softly lamp-lit interior; it looks like the kind of decadent, westernized restaurant that Hunan's most famous son, Mao Zedong, would have targeted in the Cultural Revolution. He might not have been wild about the indifferent red-braised pork that bears his name, either. But the whole steamed sea bass in spicy bean sauce is spectacular, the longevity chicken soup with ginseng tastes like it was watched over by a roomful of grandmothers, and the cocktails are so well made that you can't quite believe you're drinking them inside a plywood box down the street from Trump Tower.  40 West 56th Street (Avenue of the Americas), Midtown; 212-213-2299; bluewillownyc.com.  Dr Clark  New Yorkers associate the Japanese island of Hokkaido with excellent sea urchin. People from Hokkaido, though, associate it with mutton. Dr Clark (''NYC's first Hokkaido restaurant and karaoke bar,'' per its website) gives you both, though not necessarily on the same plate. Sea urchin is stirred with rice and stuffed into the bellies of squid; warmed with shaved bottarga to make a sauce for noodles; and used as a dressing for French fries. The mutton steals the spotlight, though, even though it is, in point of fact, lamb. It's prepared in about a dozen ways, but almost everybody at Dr Clark orders jingisukan, marinated lamb cooked with bean sprouts and onions on a domed griddle that is said to be a descendant of Genghis Khan's helmet. It's a meal for a group, and all the better if you have it outside at one of the sunken kotatsu tables, which have built-in heaters and blankets for cool nights.  104 Bayard Street (Baxter Street), Chinatown; 917-426-4454; drclarkhouse.com.  Empanology at the Bronx Brewery  After losing its bricks-and-mortar shop in the pandemic, Empanology may have found a forever home in the backyard of the Bronx Brewery in Mott Haven, under the tracks where freight trains and Acela coaches clack along regularly. The empanadas are palm-size, with flaky, thin wrappers, but they are stuffed to capacity. Fillings change frequently, and on a recent weekend the Empanologists' range stretched from mozzarella with tomato sauce and garlic (the ''piece of pizza'') to a bananas Foster pocket with graham cracker dipping sauce. There are also tacos, burgers and sandwiches including, in a true expression of the terroir, a vegan chopped cheese. The cooking is impressive for a kitchen inside a modified storage container hiked up on tire jacks; it easily keeps up with the brewery's left-field notions like an I.P.A. that tastes like mango lassi.  856 East 136th Street (Walnut Avenue), Mott Haven, the Bronx; 718-402-1000; thebronxbrewery.com.  For All Things Good  Masa is still the Achilles' heel of New York's Mexican food scene. For All Things Good, a cafe in Bedford-Stuyvesant, spent the early months of the pandemic learning to make it from old Mexican strains of blue, purple and yellow corn. The masa, rolled and stretched into different forms, is at the center of almost everything on the menu: half-moon quesadillas, griddled or fried for quesadillas doradas; tender, thick sopes under chorizo and refried beans; salsa verde and supple melted Chihuahua cheese inside an isosceles triangle of masa called a tetela; crunchy round volcanes covered with the same fillings that go inside the tacos. The cooking leans toward a lighter, somewhat Brooklynized view of tradition, meaning vegans will have an easier time with the menu than they would at a regular tripe-and-tongue taqueria.  343 Franklin Avenue (Greene Avenue), Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn; 929-204-4154; forallthingsgoodbk.com.  Kimika  It takes a light hand to mash up Italian and Japanese cuisines and not get mush. At Kimika, that hand belongs to Christine Lau. Her pizzettes, topped with things like shaved mortadella and strands of stracciatella, are airier than fried pizza has any right to be. A dish called ''roe roe roe roe spaghetti'' turns four kinds of fish eggs into a sauce that skims across the ocean without drowning in it. Ms. Lau even finds a smart new use for shishito peppers, stuffing them with soy-enhanced Italian sausage before frying them. The theme is carried into the intelligently assembled cocktails, like the reworking of Bar Goto's Sakura martini focused by a few drops of brine.  40 Kenmare Street (Elizabeth Street), NoLIta; 212-256-9280; kimikanyc.com.  Kokomo  The Caribbean getaway that's been almost impossible to take this past year has come to us instead, setting up its palapas, palms and rum drinks across from the Williamsburg waterfront at Kokomo. This being New York, people eating there tend to dress up in their nightclub outfits instead of cabana wear. But the food is transporting, and fun: wings in a sweet gochujang glaze; a flatbread carrying a substantial load of Jamaican Rasta pasta; chicken and waffles with both whipped coconut cream and a piercing Scotch bonnet hot sauce. Even the vegan dishes are lavish, like the fried lentil balls in rich coconut curry. Pandemic gloom isn't much in evidence, and nobody seems to miss it.  65 Kent Avenue (North 10th Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn; 347-799-1312; kokomonyc.com.  The Migrant Kitchen  The menu begins with the Arab imprint on Latin American food, then scrambles everything up into new, cumin-scented forms. Sumac lamb goes into a torta; carnitas go into a shawarma sandwich; falafel goes into a waffle iron and emerges as ''fawaffles,'' which then become a partner for fried chicken, of course. What might be kitchen pranks are executed with solid culinary chops abetted by a more-is-more seasoning philosophy. The Migrant Kitchen is certainly one of the most original restaurants ever to land on Stone Street, not least because it doubles as a charity; for every $12 spent, a free meal is sent out to a New Yorker who needs one.  45 Stone Street (William Street), financial district; 917-747-5601; themigrantkitchennyc.com.  Mokyo  If you've been to Kyungmin Hyun's first restaurant, Thursday Kitchen, you already know she has the rare gift of setting her imagination flying and then calling it back to earth when it counts. At Mokyo, around the corner on St. Marks, she proves it again with a fresh series of aerobatics. The flavors of a sidewalk vendor's elote are encapsulated in a ravioli filling. Basil leaves and Brazil nuts bring a twisted pesto aspect to Taiwanese flat noodles in Sichuan chile oil. She hovers over Korean cuisine, but always seems to have time for a quick side trip to Maine or Louisiana or Spain. Her original intent was for Mokyo to be the straight-faced younger sibling, but she had to adapt to pandemic life, which is why her more serious second restaurant will give you a glow-in-the-dark cocktail in a plastic pouch.  109 St. Marks Place (Avenue A), East Village; 646-850-0650; mokyony.com.  Rangoon  Last year, a floating Burmese pop-up called Rangoon NoodleLab put down roots on Prospect Place in Brooklyn and shortened its name to Rangoon. Noodles are still very much in the picture; the mondi thoke, cold vermicelli enhanced with chickpea powder, is excellent, as is the mohinga, a fragrant fish soup with rice noodles and a lacy onion fritter. But Rangoon also has curries with dense overlapping layers of spices and a modern rendition of the classic Burmese tea-leaf salad lahpet thoke that crackles with toasted seeds and nuts. The tiny dining room was not built for the age of social distancing, but there's a charming backyard and an all-white louvered platform in the street that should someday go in the Museum of Pandemic Architecture.  500 Prospect Place (Classon Avenue), Crown Heights, Brooklyn; 917-442-0100; rangoon.nyc.  Silver Apricot  A Hudson Valley farm-to-table approach is generously interwoven with Chinese ideas at Simone Tong's latest restaurant, Silver Apricot. In the fall, thin coins of Chinese sausage clung to caramelized brussels sprouts in a sweet-spicy maple glaze. With spring, she has moved on to grilled asparagus and steelhead trout given a sweet-and-sour treatment. The same sensibility is in place, though, and so are the spirals of puff pastry seasoned with northern Chinese zha jiang, a savory sauce more commonly found on noodles. All the wines are American, and many are made in the gentler, less pumped-up style of the past two decades. There are discoveries to be made, and one of them is how readily these wines harmonize with Ms. Tong's cooking.  20 Cornelia Street (West Fourth Street), Greenwich Village; 929-367-8664; silverapricot.nyc.  Thai Diner  Ann Redding and Matt Danzer wanted Thai Diner to be the more casual sister to Uncle Boons, one of the city's defining restaurants of the past decade. Then they closed Uncle Boons permanently in the pandemic. This painful loss for New York is partly offset by the survival of a few key dishes at the newer place, like the potent khao soi and the straightforward fried rice made with enough lump crab meat to silence a Baltimorean. There are fresh consolations, too. Because it's a diner you can have breakfast, like an egg sandwich filled out by sai oua, or a plain American hamburger with crinkle fries for lunch. And the candy display definitely outshines that classic diner send-off, a dusty bowl of pastel mints with a spoon. The dish that may cause you to make up reasons to wander down Mott Street, though, is the pink mound of chopped liver laced with red curry paste; spread it on a scrap of roti with some fried shallots.  186 Mott Street (Kenmare Street), NoLIta; 646-559-4140; thaidiner.com.  Tong  Kub klaem or kap klaem are what people in Thailand eat when they're not really eating -- whiskey snacks. A few years after Andy Ricker's Whiskey Soda Lounge tried to make kub klaem a thing, four Thai-American restaurant workers are having another go at it at Tong, in Bushwick, Brooklyn. The chef, Chetkangwan Thipruetree, has assembled a big list of little bites: mum, a crumbly and tangy beef-and-liver sausage; beef tartare in the Isan style, raging with chiles; banana-blossom fritters, which unfold as they fry to look something like soft-shell crabs; and grilled octopus and red chiles splashed with a sort of vinaigrette of lime juice and fresh herbs. A few of the cocktails sound like fruit salad with alcohol, but a homage to the manhattan, the Old Pop, only goes as far as orange blossom water.  321 Starr Street (Cypress Avenue), Bushwick, Brooklyn; 718-366-0586; tongbrooklyn.com.  Yellow Rose  Tex-Mex is probably the least respected of America's regional cuisines. In part this is because, like some Texas politicians, it doesn't always stand up to scrutiny once it leaves the state. Yellow Rose is a rare case of a Tex Mex taqueria in New York that honors the legacy of refried pintos, salsa tatemada and the all-important flour tortilla. To avoid starting an interstate war, let's pass over the queso, which is made with cashew cheese. Instead we shall zero in on the wonderful fresh tortillas and the tacos built on them: chicken stewed in salsa verde until it's olive green; beef-cheek barbacoa; fried cubes of potato warmed in ranchero sauce; and beef braised in what Texans, and pretty much only Texans, call ''chili gravy.'' If you buy a dozen, it costs $50 and you get to carry them away in a pizza box, which leaves one hand free to carry a jug of margaritas.  102 Third Avenue (13th Street), East Village; 212-529-8880; yellowrosenyc.com.  Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram , Facebook , YouTube and Pinterest . Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice .  EMAIL petewells@nytimes.com.  Clockwise from top: Kokomo, in Brooklyn, is an island vacation for people who haven't been able to travel; Ayat presents Palestinian cooking and halal meat grown on small local farms; Kimika serves Japanese-Italian food, like this prosciutto fried pizza; crispy pata is one of many Filipino classics at Bilao; and Korean cuisine hovers over the imaginative cooking at Mokyo. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CLAY WILLIAMS FOR THE new_york_times; ADAM FRIEDLANDER FOR THE new_york_times; JEENAH MOON FOR THE new_york_times; JENNY HUANG FOR THE new_york_times) (D7); Top: outside Dr Clark, where the kotatsu tables have space on top for a grill and underneath for your feet. Above from left: lemongrass fish noodle soup at Rangoon; masa ground from purple, yellow and blue Mexican corn at For All Things Good; oysters and banana blossom pancake at Tong. Below, Binchotan grilled prawns at Silver Apricot. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CLAY WILLIAMS FOR THE new_york_times; LIZ CLAYMAN FOR THE new_york_times;ADAM FRIEDLANDER FOR THE new_york_times; EMON HASSAN FOR THE new_york_times) (D8)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00053 "
367		"    Lately, It's Curry's Game. The Rest of the N.B.A. Is Just Playing in It.  By Victor Mather  909 words 21 April 2021   9     It is not that Stephen Curry has not been good all season. He has had games of 62 and 57 points, after all. But with Golden State mired in mediocrity and players like Nikola Jokic and Joel Embiid emerging as leading candidates for the Most Valuable Player Award, Curry had faded a bit into the background.  That has changed in the last month. After five games away nursing a bruised tailbone, Curry returned and began a streak of 30-point games that has now reached 11, breaking Kobe Bryant's record for a player who is 33 or older.  The run has revived talk of a third M.V.P. trophy for Curry, and Golden State looks like it has a good chance of making the playoffs -- as the team that no high seed wants to face.  Here's a look at the 11-game run that turned around Curry's season, and perhaps Golden State's, too.  1. March 29, vs. Bulls, 32 points, win  Returning from his injury, Curry helped Golden State end a four-game losing streak. ''It wasn't fun, but I got through it,'' he said.  2. April 1, at Heat, 36 points, loss  The attention fell on the Heat debut of Victor Oladipo, and Miami beat Golden State by 7. It would turn out to be the heaviest loss in Golden State's last 11 games, in which the team went 7-4. Curry still managed 11 rebounds, though, his best total of the run.  3. April 4, at Hawks, 37 points, loss  After missing a game at Toronto because of the lingering tailbone injury (not coincidentally, Golden State lost that game by 53 points), Curry was back, wearing protective padding. ''He pretty much did whatever he wanted in that first half,'' Hawks Coach Nate McMillan said.  4. April 6, vs. Bucks, 41 points, win  For the first time in the streak, Golden State beat an elite team, getting a 1-point win with a late comeback. Of course, the Bucks badly missed their own star, Giannis Antetokounmpo.  5. April 9, vs. Wizards, 32 points, loss  Perhaps the poorest performance of the run, despite the 32 points. Curry shot 11 of 25 from the field and his team lost to the middling Wizards at home. Curry missed a long 3-pointer to tie the score as time expired.  6. April 10, vs. Rockets, 38 points, win  A sixth straight 30-point game made the scoring streak the longest of Curry's career, and he wasn't done. ''He had a highlight reel worth of plays out there tonight,'' Coach Steve Kerr said.  7. April 12, vs. Nuggets, 53 points, win  Curry's best game thus far and his first 50-point night since February. He had 10 3-pointers, the most so far in his streak, and the start of a run of four of five games with at least 10. Curry also passed Wilt Chamberlain as the Warriors' career scoring leader.  8. April 14, at Thunder, 42 points, win  In the biggest team win of the streak, Golden State beat Oklahoma City by 38 points. Curry shot 14 of 20 and had eight assists. Draymond Green said he knew a big Curry night was coming. ''I can kind of tell when he comes out,'' Green said. ''Just the look in his eyes.'' Another 11 3s gave Curry 29 over three games, an N.B.A. record.  9. April 15, at Cavaliers, 33 points, win  A fourth straight win for Golden State, for the first time this season. Curry was only 4 of 13 from behind the 3-point line but compensated with eight 2-pointers. Golden State improved to 16-1 in its last 17 games against Cleveland.  10. April 17, at Celtics, 47 points, loss  Golden State's winning streak ended in a closely contested game, and Curry kept scoring, with 11 3s. ''It took everything,'' said Kemba Walker of the Celtics, adding: ''We knew it was going to be tough. These guys are playing so well. Obviously, they've got one of the best players in the world. He's incredible.''  11. April 19, at Sixers, 49 points, win  Golden State took on one of the best teams in the N.B.A. and won. Ten more 3-pointers for Curry, who faced off against his brother, Seth. The 11th straight 30-point game is a record for players 33 and older, surpassing Kobe Bryant's mark. ''I don't know if I've ever seen anything like the run he's on,'' Sixers Coach Doc Rivers said.  Next up? A visit to Washington on Wednesday night.  ONE FOR THE BOOKS: When Stephen Curry scored 49 points against the 76ers on Monday, he set a record for consecutive 30-point games by players 33 and older. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT SLOCUM/ASSOCIATED PRESS);  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JED JACOBSOHN/ASSOCIATED PRESS); END OF A STREAK: The Warriors' four-game winning streak was halted on April 17 by the Celtics, although Curry scored 47 points. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL DWYER/ASSOCIATED PRESS);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY SUE OGROCKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARY HOLT/USA TODAY SPORTS, VIA REUTERS); SIGN OF THE TIMES: Curry autographed his jersey for the rapper Two Chainz in Atlanta on April 4. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN BAZEMORE/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004j "
368		"    U.S. Needs a Jan. 6 Commission  By Jesse Wegman  1,335 words 21 April 2021   26     The attack on our democracy must be investigated to prevent history from repeating itself.  Barely 100 days have passed since American democracy came under direct attack on Jan. 6 -- a date that should live in infamy.  But the Capitol riot is already in danger of being memory-holed.  This cannot be allowed to happen. President Biden and Congress must not push it off any longer: As soon as possible, the American people need a thorough, unsparing and authoritative investigation that details exactly what took place and how on that horrific day, identifies the larger political and societal forces that encouraged it and points the way toward a future in which such an attack is harder if not impossible to pull off.  The only legitimate way to achieve these goals is through the establishment of an independent and bipartisan commission. Even before Jan. 6, it was clear that a commission would be necessary to take stock of the sheer amount of damage wrought by the Trump administration. After Jan. 6, it became clear that another was needed.  Five people died on that day, and it was only by sheer luck and some quick thinking by Capitol guards that the death toll wasn't far higher. Rioters were openly intent on kidnapping and even killing top Democratic lawmakers, then-Vice President Mike Pence and anyone else they were told had betrayed them.  What's standing in the way of a commission? The biggest obstacle is obvious: partisanship. The perpetrators of the Capitol attack were not terrorists on a murderous mission from abroad, but average Americans -- grade-school teachers and public accountants, cops and clam-shack owners -- who stormed the seat of American government, drunk on a lie about the 2020 election that had been fed to them for months by Donald Trump, his allies and leading Republicans in Congress.  Now that lie has metastasized to include an upside-down history of what happened on Jan. 6, regurgitated by many top Republicans -- hence the right-wing agitprop fantasy in which shadowy leftist militants were the true villains.  It's no surprise that roughly half of Republican voters now say they believe that the riot was a largely peaceful protest or that the only violence was committed by ''left-wing activists'' or others ''trying to make Trump look bad,'' according to a Reuters/Ipsos poll. An overwhelming majority of Republicans continue to believe that Joe Biden did not legitimately win the presidency.  This mass delusion is one of the main reasons an independent commission is essential. A commission's report has the opportunity to establish the authoritative, fact-based narrative of what happened and why. Such a narrative won't magically convince millions of people who are not interested in hearing the truth. But it could at least ''narrow the range of permissible lies,'' as the writer and politician Michael Ignatieff once said about truth commissions. It could provide concrete recommendations for Congress to adopt now, as a way to prevent the next Jan. 6.  Prospects for a congressionally created commission looked good at first, as Republicans and Democrats in the House each drafted their own bills, both of which had smart ideas. So did a separate one proposed by the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, modeled on the successful and respected 9/11 commission.  But negotiations have foundered over two key points of dispute: who sits on the commission and what those people investigate. Ms. Pelosi's bill provides for 11 commissioners, with seven named by Mr. Biden or Democrats in Congress, and four named by Republicans. The Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, rejected this, calling it ''partisan by design.'' In response, Ms. Pelosi is threatening to abandon the process and leave any investigations to the House's standing committees, or a select committee.  That would be a big mistake. As Americans have witnessed time and again, politically sensitive investigations conducted by sitting lawmakers are prone to being hijacked by grandstanders who care less about getting the truth than about getting more votes in their next election (see: Benghazi). Even if that weren't an issue, there's the problem of limited attention. Lawmakers are constantly dealing with a long list of pressing issues. Adding a major investigation to that docket would only slow it down, and make it vulnerable to back-room deal-making.  The solution is to divide the commissioners equally between Democrats and Republicans, but not include any current lawmakers or public officials. Nor should there be any role in choosing commissioners for the 147 lawmakers, including the House minority leader Kevin McCarthy, who endorsed the lie about the election by voting to reject the Electoral College results hours after the insurrection had been put down.  The good news is, that's not necessary. There are plenty of Republicans in public life who put their country above their party, like the former national security officials and lawmakers who this month signed a bipartisan letter calling for a wide-ranging independent commission.  This isn't to say Congress has no role to play. Two Senate committees are already conducting bipartisan hearings on some of the security and intelligence failings surrounding the Capitol riot. Last week, a new report by the Capitol Police inspector general found that officers were told not to use more aggressive tactics to fend off the mob, even though there were warnings that violence was likely. The dozens of prosecutions of those who breached the Capitol or committed violence will also bring to light crucial information.  These are all-important details to get into the record, but by themselves they are far from sufficient. As the national security officials' letter made clear, any thorough investigation into the events of Jan. 6 must dig much deeper, to address the complex interplay of threats that led into and out of that day: coordinated disinformation campaigns on Facebook and other social media; the money being funneled to extremist networks; the ongoing specter of white supremacist violence, which the Department of Homeland Security has identified as a top threat.  A commission addressing all of these issues could include a wider range of perspectives, too -- not just former elected officials but also political scientists who study the rise and fall of democracies, as well as experts in cybersecurity, disinformation and counterterrorism.  Finally and crucially, a Jan. 6 commission would need to be well funded and properly staffed and have the power to subpoena both documents and witnesses. It also needs the time to do a complete investigation, which could stretch well into 2022. The value of that investigation wouldn't be limited to whatever final report it produced, because the public information and witness testimony that it generated would deepen the public's understanding of the issues.  Can Congress manage to pass legislation creating a commission that can do all this? Given that its own members were the targets of the mob on Jan. 6, and in some cases may be alive today only because they took one stairwell instead of another, one would hope so. Certainly a congressionally created commission would be best. But if the process remains bogged down in partisan haggling, Mr. Biden needs to step in and do the job.  It is critical to the future of the Republic that the truth of Jan. 6 be told, and that the bigger picture be understood. The worst possible outcome would be widespread public amnesia, which would guarantee that history would repeat -- and next time, American democracy might not survive it.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  Jesse Wegman is a member of the editorial board.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERTO SCHMIDT/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00052 "
369		"    Wielding Political Influence: 12 Megadonors, $3.4 Billion  By Shane Goldmacher  779 words 21 April 2021   22     A new study shows the role of the super rich in politics since the Supreme Court loosened restrictions on political spending more than a decade ago.  A dozen megadonors and their spouses contributed a combined $3.4 billion to federal candidates and political groups since 2009, accounting for nearly one out of every 13 dollars raised, according to a new report.  The report, produced by Issue One, a nonpartisan group that seeks to reduce the influence of money in politics, shows the top 12 donors split equally between six Democrats and six Republicans. The list includes multiple Wall Street billionaires and investors, a Facebook co-founder, a shipping magnate and the heir to a family fortune dating back to the Gilded Age.  The study quantifies the intensifying concentration and increasing role of the super rich in American politics following the loosening of restrictions on political spending by the U.S. Supreme Court more than a decade ago.  ''This is a stark illustration of our broken campaign finance system,'' said Nick Penniman, the founder and chief executive of Issue One. ''Today, a handful of megadonors wield outsized influence in our politics.'' Mr. Penniman called on Congress ''to pass sweeping reforms to create a democracy that works for everyone.''  The growing influence of multimillion-dollar megadonors has been accompanied by another, competing trend: a surge of small online donations to politicians of both parties. Those contributions -- in $5, $10 and $25 increments -- have given Democrats and Republicans an alternate source of money beyond the super rich.  Still, the study found that the top 100 ZIP codes for political giving in the United States, which hold less than 1 percent of the total population, accounted for roughly 20 percent of the $45 billion that federal candidates and political groups raised between January 2009 and December 2020. The study used data from the Center for Responsive Politics, which compiles figures from the Federal Election Commission.  Some of the top ZIP codes for giving weren't even populated by any people at all; instead, they were primarily associated with skyscrapers and post office boxes that were used as business addresses by the wealthy.  The single biggest spender on federal campaigns from 2009 to 2020 was Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City, who spent $1.4 billion. Of that, $1 billion went toward his own failed campaign for president in 2020 and $314 million went to other federal candidates, super PACs and political groups.  He is the only donor to spend more than $1 billion. The No. 2 contributor is another Democrat, Tom Steyer, who, like Mr. Bloomberg, lost his bid for president in 2020. Mr. Steyer and his wife, Kat Taylor, have spent $653 million, with more than half going toward his own presidential campaign and $311 million to other federal candidates and committees.  The report does not include giving to state-level campaigns or politically connected nonprofit groups, which can often remain undisclosed.  The largest Republican contributor was Sheldon Adelson, the casino magnate, and his wife, Miriam Adelson, a physician. The Adelsons have contributed $523 million to Republican candidates and committees since 2009.  Mr. Adelson's death in January 2021, at age 87, leaves a potential major shortfall for Republicans who have come to rely upon his largess. Republican operatives have privately fretted that while Dr. Adelson has been politically engaged, she may not have the same appetite for political giving as her late husband.  The report said that all 12 top donors were white and that the top 100 ZIP codes for donations were ''typically both more white and more affluent'' than the nation as a whole.  The other top contributors among Republicans were Richard and Elizabeth Uihlein ($138 million), founders of Uline shipping; Ken Griffin ($107 million), the investor and founder of Citadel LLC; Patricia and Timothy Mellon ($70 million), an heir to the Mellon fortune and chairman of Pan Am Systems; Marlene and Joe Ricketts ($66 million), the founder of T.D. Ameritrade and whose family owns the Chicago Cubs; and Paul Singer ($63 million), an investor and founder of Elliott Management.  Among Democrats, the other biggest donors were Donald Sussman ($98 million), the founder of Paloma Funds; Jim Simons ($93 million), the founder of Renaissance Technologies, and his wife, Marilyn; Fred Eychaner ($92 million), a media mogul; and Dustin Moskovitz ($83 million), the co-founder of Facebook, and his wife, Cari Tuna.  The single biggest spender on federal campaigns from 2009 to 2020 was Michael R. Bloomberg. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Chang W. Lee/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004g "
370		"    South Korean Leader Urges Biden to Salvage Nuclear Deal With North  By Choe Sang-Hun  1,647 words 21 April 2021   10     SEOUL -- President Moon Jae-in of South Korea has a message for the United States: President Biden needs to engage now with North Korea.  In an interview with The new_york_times, Mr. Moon pushed the American leader to kick-start negotiations with the government of Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, after two years in which diplomatic progress stalled, even reversed. Denuclearization, the South Korean president said, was a ''matter of survival'' for his country.  He also urged the United States to cooperate with China on North Korea and other issues of global concern, including climate change. The deteriorating relations between the superpowers, he said, could undermine any negotiations over denuclearization.  ''If tensions between the United States and China intensify, North Korea can take advantage of it and capitalize on it,'' Mr. Moon said.  It was part plea, part sales pitch from Mr. Moon, who sat down with The Times as the United States tries to rebuild its relationships in the region with an eye to countering China's influence, and North Korea builds up its nuclear arsenal. Mr. Moon, who is set to meet with Mr. Biden next month in Washington, appeared ready to step once again into the role of mediator between the two sides.  In the interview, Mr. Moon was proud of his deft diplomatic maneuvering in 2018, when he steered the two unpredictable leaders of North Korea and the United States to meet in person. He was also pragmatic, tacitly acknowledging that his work to achieve denuclearization and peace on the Korean Peninsula has since unraveled.  President Donald J. Trump left office without removing a single North Korean nuclear warhead. Mr. Kim has resumed weapons tests.  ''He beat around the bush and failed to pull it through,'' Mr. Moon said of Mr. Trump's efforts on North Korea. ''The most important starting point for both governments is to have the will for dialogue and to sit down face to face at an early date.''  Now in his final year in office, Mr. Moon is determined to start all over again -- and knows he faces a very different leader in Mr. Biden.  Mr. Moon bet on Mr. Trump's style, emphasizing personality-driven ''top-down diplomacy'' through one-on-one meetings with Mr. Kim. Mr. Biden, he said, was returning to the traditional ''bottom-up'' approach in which negotiators haggle over details before seeking approval from their bosses.  ''I hope that Biden will go down as a historic president that has achieved substantive and irreversible progress for the complete denuclearization and peace settlement on the Korean Peninsula,'' Mr. Moon said in the interview from Sangchunjae, a traditional hanok on the grounds of the executive residence, Blue House.  Mr. Moon's visit to Washington comes at a crucial moment. The Biden administration is wrapping up its monthslong policy review of North Korea, one of the most pressing geopolitical issues for the United States.  Mr. Biden has started reversing many of his predecessor's foreign policy decisions. But Mr. Moon warned that it would be a mistake to kill the 2018 Singapore agreement between Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim that set out broad goals for denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula.  ''I believe that if we build on what President Trump has left, we will see this effort come to fruition under Biden's leadership,'' he said.  Mr. Moon called for the United States and North Korea to move in ''gradual and phased'' steps toward denuclearization, exchanging concessions and incentives ''simultaneously'' along the way. It was a well-worn script for Mr. Moon, who paused occasionally during the interview to reference his notes and punctuated his speech with small yet resolute hand gestures.  Some past American negotiators and Mr. Moon's conservative critics dismiss such a strategy, saying North Korea would stall and undermine international sanctions, the best leverage Washington has against the impoverished country. In its annual threat assessment released last week, the United States' director of national intelligence said Mr. Kim ''believes that over time he will gain international acceptance and respect as a nuclear power.''  But Mr. Moon's team argues that the phased approach is the most realistic, even if it is imperfect. As his administration sees it, North Korea would never give up its arsenal in one quick deal, lest the regime lose its only bargaining chip with Washington.  The key, Mr. Moon said, is for the United States and North Korea to work out a ''mutually trusted road map.''  American negotiators under Mr. Trump never made it to that point. Both sides could not even agree on a first step for the North and what reward Washington would provide in return.  Mr. Moon is not only scrambling to salvage his ''Korean Peninsula Peace Process'' but also arguably his greatest diplomatic legacy.  As his North Korea policy has faltered, critics have called him a naïve pacifist who bet too much on Mr. Kim's unproven commitment to denuclearization.  ''His good intentions brought bad consequences,'' said Kim Sung-han, a professor at Korea University. ''His mediation has not worked nor do we have progress in denuclearization. His time is running out.''  Since the negotiations have stalled, Mr. Moon's troubles at home have mounted. His approval ratings have plunged to record lows amid real-estate and other scandals. This month, angry voters delivered crushing defeats to his Democratic Party in the mayoral elections in South Korea's two largest cities.  That is a sharp turn of fortune from the start of his administration, when Mr. Moon parlayed a hair-raising geopolitical crisis into a signature policy initiative.  ''When I took office back in 2017, we were really concerned about the possibility of war breaking out once again on the Korean Peninsula,'' he said.  Four days into his tenure, North Korea launched its Hwasong-12 intermediate-range ballistic missile that it said could target Hawaii and Alaska. Then the North tested a hydrogen bomb and three intercontinental ballistic missiles. In response, Mr. Trump threatened ''fire and fury,'' as American Navy carrier groups steamed toward the peninsula.  Mr. Moon's first diplomatic win came when Mr. Kim accepted his invitation to send a delegation to the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea. Soon after, Mr. Moon met with Mr. Kim on the heavily armed inter-Korean border.  During that meeting, Mr. Moon said the North Korean dictator intimated that disarmament was a real possibility. ''If safety can be guaranteed without nuclear weapons, why would I struggle to hold onto them even at the cost of sanctions?'' Mr. Moon recalled Mr. Kim saying.  He said he made that pitch to Mr. Trump, imploring him to meet Mr. Kim. At their made-for-TV summit in Singapore, Mr. Trump promised ''security guarantees'' for North Korea while Mr. Kim committed to ''work toward complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.''  ''It's clearly an achievement for President Trump that he held the first-ever summit meeting between North Korea and the United States,'' he said.  But Mr. Moon also lamented that Mr. Trump never followed through, after declaring that ''there is no longer a Nuclear Threat from North Korea.'' When Mr. Kim and Mr. Trump met again in 2019 in Hanoi, Vietnam, the negotiations went nowhere, and the men left without an agreement on how to move forward with the Singapore deal.  While Mr. Moon was careful to dole out praise for Mr. Trump, he also seemed frustrated by the former president's erratic behavior and Twitter diplomacy. Mr. Trump canceled or downsized the annual joint military drills that the United States conducts with the South and demanded what Mr. Moon called an ''excessive amount'' to keep 28,500 American troops in South Korea.  Mr. Moon said he had decided to suspend negotiations over the so-called defense cost-sharing agreement during Mr. Trump's last months in office. South Korea was willing to pay more, given its growing economic size, but Mr. Trump's demands violated the foundation of the two countries' relationship.  ''His demand lacked reasonable and rational calculation,'' Mr. Moon said.  The fact, he said, that Washington and Seoul could strike a deal within 46 days of Mr. Biden's inauguration was a ''clear testament to the importance President Biden attaches to'' the alliance.  Mr. Moon is hopeful about the progress the new American leader can make on North Korea, although any significant breakthrough may be unrealistic, given the deep mistrust between Washington and Pyongyang.  Mr. Biden said last month that he was ''prepared for some form of diplomacy'' with North Korea, but that ''it has to be conditioned upon the end result of denuclearization.''  North Korea has offered ideas on a phased approach starting with the demolition of its only-known nuclear test site, followed by the dismantling of a rocket engine test facility and the nuclear complex in Yongbyon north of Pyongyang.  Mr. Moon said he believed such steps, if matched with American concessions, could lead to the removal of the North's more prized assets, like I.C.B.M.s. In that scenario, he said, the move toward complete denuclearization becomes ''irreversible.''  ''This dialogue and diplomacy can lead to denuclearization,'' he said. ''If both sides learn from the failure in Hanoi and put their heads together for more realistic ideas, I am confident that they can find a solution.''  President Donald J. Trump and Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, top, met in Singapore in 2018 and set out broad goals for denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula. North Korea launched a ballistic missile four days after President Moon Jae-in of South Korea, right, took office in 2017. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times; KOREAN CENTRAL NEWS AGENCY, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS; CHANG W. LEE/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004f "
371		"    In Ireland, Supermarket Offers Free Period Items  By Isabella Kwai  630 words 21 April 2021   9     The move by Lidl comes as Ireland's Parliament considers a legal measure to make period products free in the country. It's among a growing number of such initiatives that aim to ease an inequality.  As broader recognition has emerged of the cost of essential period products, governments around the world have taken strides to address the issue of ''period poverty.'' Scotland last year passed legislation ensuring that the products are available for free to all who need them, and students in New Zealand will soon be able to get free menstrual products in schools.  Now, retailers are getting involved.  In Ireland, the supermarket chain Lidl will offer free period products in its stores across the country -- the first major retailer to make period products available for free nationwide.  The initiative comes as the Irish government is discussing a bill that would enshrine free period products for all into law, similar to a measure in neighboring Scotland.  ''The guiding principle of this initiative is the inherent respect for the dignity of all those concerned,'' Aoife Clarke, a spokeswoman for Lidl Ireland, said in a statement, adding that the company wanted to support girls and women as a ''family retailer.''  Activists welcomed the move as a sign that big businesses can strengthen campaigns to end ''period poverty'' -- in which circumstances, financial or otherwise, leave those who menstruate without access to sanitary products.  The step by a major retailer to provide free sanitary products is a ''game-changer,'' said Claire Hunt, founder of Homeless Period Ireland, a volunteer organization that partnered with Lidl Ireland on the initiative.  She said the move sent a ''positive message'' that has even greater significance given the financial strain caused by the pandemic.  ''If you're experiencing food poverty or fuel poverty, you're inevitably going to experience period poverty too,'' Ms. Hunt said.  Under the initiative, which was announced on Monday, customers can claim a free box of sanitary pads or tampons each month beginning in May by downloading a coupon in the retailer's app.  Lidl, a German-owned discount retailer, said it would also donate free period products to the Simon Communities of Ireland, a network of homelessness charities, and to Ladies Gaelic Football Association clubs across the country.  Neighboring Britain has also taken strides to address the issue of period poverty, particularly in Scotland, which last November became the first country to enact legislation making period products available free of charge to those who need them. In January, Britain's government abolished a tax that classified sanitary products as nonessential, a charge that had been denounced as sexist. Schools across England and Wales offer period products, and Northern Ireland adopted a similar program last year.  In Ireland, about half of girls age 12 to 19 reported occasionally struggling to afford sanitary products, according to a 2018 survey by the children's charity Plan International.  And although campaigners called the involvement of a big retailer promising, they said that more still needed to be done to address the underlying issues of poverty and to provide young people with better education on menstruation.  ''If anything, it just opens conversations, and that's the important thing,'' Ms. Hunt said. ''This is a dignity issue.''  Campaigners elsewhere agree.  Gabby Edlin, the chief executive of Bloody Good Period, a charity in Britain that provides and campaigns for free period products, said it was a symbol of change that businesses were getting involved.  ''Nobody should be going into debt or struggling for money for something that is an essential part of human life,'' she said.  A Lidl supermarket in Dublin last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Artur Widak/NurPhoto, via Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004d "
372		"    Less Sleep in Middle Age May Raise Dementia Risk  By Pam Belluck  1,618 words 21 April 2021   23     The research, tracking thousands of people from age 50 on, suggests those who sleep six hours or less a night are more likely to develop dementia in their late 70s.  Could getting too little sleep increase your chances of developing dementia?  For years, researchers have pondered this and other questions about how sleep relates to cognitive decline. Answers have been elusive because it is hard to know if insufficient sleep is a symptom of the brain changes that underlie dementia -- or if it can actually help cause those changes.  Now, a large new study reports some of the most persuasive findings yet to suggest that people who don't get enough sleep in their 50s and 60s may be more likely to develop dementia when they are older.  The research, published Tuesday in the journal Nature Communications, has limitations but also several strengths. It followed nearly 8,000 people in Britain for about 25 years, beginning when they were 50 years old. It found that those who consistently reported sleeping six hours or less on an average weeknight were about 30 percent more likely than people who regularly got seven hours sleep (defined as ''normal'' sleep in the study) to be diagnosed with dementia nearly three decades later.  ''It would be really unlikely that almost three decades earlier, this sleep was a symptom of dementia, so it's a great study in providing strong evidence that sleep is really a risk factor,'' said Dr. Kristine Yaffe, a professor of neurology and psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, who was not involved in the study.  Pre-dementia brain changes like accumulations of proteins associated with Alzheimer's are known to begin about 15 to 20 years before people exhibit memory and thinking problems, so sleep patterns within that time frame could be considered an emerging effect of the disease. That has posed a ''chicken or egg question of which comes first, the sleep problem or the pathology,'' said Dr. Erik Musiek, a neurologist and co-director of the Center on Biological Rhythms and Sleep at Washington University in St. Louis, who was not involved in the new research.  ''I don't know that this study necessarily seals the deal, but it gets closer because it has a lot of people who were relatively young,'' he said. ''There's a decent chance that they are capturing people in middle age before they have Alzheimer's disease pathology or plaques and tangles in their brain.''  Drawing on medical records and other data from a prominent study of British civil servants called Whitehall II, which began in the mid-1980s, the researchers tracked how many hours 7,959 participants said they slept in reports filed six times between 1985 and 2016. By the end of the study, 521 people had been diagnosed with dementia at an average age of 77.  The team was able to adjust for several behaviors and characteristics that might influence people's sleep patterns or dementia risk, said an author of the study, Séverine Sabia, an epidemiologist at Inserm, the French public-health research center. Those included smoking, alcohol consumption, how physically active people were, body mass index, fruit and vegetable consumption, education level, marital status and conditions like hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease.  To clarify the sleep-dementia relationship further, researchers separated out people who had mental illnesses before age 65. Depression is considered a risk factor for dementia and ''mental health disorders are quite strongly linked with sleep disturbances,'' Dr. Sabia said. The study's analysis of participants without mental illnesses found a similar association between short-sleepers and increased risk of dementia.  The correlation also held whether or not people were taking sleep medication and whether or not they had a mutation called ApoE4 that makes people more likely to develop Alzheimer's, Dr. Sabia said.  The researchers found no general difference between men and women.  ''The study found a modest, but I would say somewhat important association of short sleep and dementia risk,'' said Pamela Lutsey, an associate professor of epidemiology and community health at the University of Minnesota, who was not involved in the research. ''Short sleep is very common and because of that, even if it's modestly associated with dementia risk, it can be important at a societal level. Short sleep is something that we have control over, something that you can change.''  Still, as with other research in this area, the study had limitations that prevent it from proving that inadequate sleep can help cause dementia. Most of the sleep data was self-reported, a subjective measure that isn't always accurate, experts said.  At one point, nearly 4,000 participants did have sleep duration measured by accelerometers and that data was consistent with their self-reported sleep times, the researchers said. Still, that quantitative measure came late in the study, when participants were about 69, making it less useful than if it had been obtained at younger ages.  In addition, most participants were white and better educated and healthier than the overall British population. And in relying on electronic medical records for dementia diagnoses, researchers might have missed some cases. They also could not identify exact types of dementia.  ''It's always difficult to know what to conclude from these kinds of studies,'' wrote Robert Howard, a professor of old age psychiatry at University College London, one of several experts who submitted comments about the study to Nature Communications. ''Insomniacs -- who probably don't need something else to ruminate about in bed,'' he added, ''shouldn't worry that they are heading for dementia unless they get off to sleep immediately.''  There are compelling scientific theories about why too little sleep might exacerbate the risk of dementia, especially Alzheimer's. Studies have found that cerebrospinal fluid levels of amyloid, a protein that clumps into plaques in Alzheimer's, ''go up if you sleep-deprive people,'' Dr. Musiek said. Other studies of amyloid and another Alzheimer's protein, tau, suggest that ''sleep is important for clearing proteins from the brain or limiting the production,'' he said.  One theory is that the more people are awake, the longer their neurons are active and the more amyloid is produced, Dr. Musiek said. Another theory is that during sleep, fluid flowing in the brain helps clear out excess proteins, so inadequate sleep means more protein buildup, he said. Some scientists also think getting sufficient time in certain sleep phases may be important for clearing proteins.  Dr. Lutsey said too little sleep might also function indirectly, fueling conditions that are known dementia risk factors. ''Think of someone who is staying up too late and having snacks, or because they get very little sleep, they have low motivation for physical activity,'' she said. ''That could predispose them to obesity and then things like diabetes and hypertension that have been pretty robustly linked to dementia risk.''  Another theory is ''a shared genetic link,'' said Dr. Yaffe, ''genetic pathways or profiles that go along with both shorter sleep and increased risk of Alzheimer's.'' She and others said it's also possible that the sleep-dementia relationship is ''bidirectional,'' with poor sleep fueling dementia, which further reduces sleep, which worsens dementia.  Experts seem to agree that researching the sleep-and-dementia connection is challenging and that previous studies have sometimes yielded confusing findings. In some studies, for example, people who sleep too long (usually measured as nine hours or more) appear to have greater dementia risk, but several of those studies were smaller or had older participants, experts said. In the new study, results hinted at increased risk for long sleepers (defined as eight hours or more because there weren't enough nine-hour sleepers, Dr. Sabia said), but the association was not statistically significant.  Experts said they couldn't think of scientific explanations for why long sleep would increase dementia risk and that it might reflect another underlying health condition.  The new study also examined whether people's sleep changed over time. There appeared to be slightly increased dementia risk in people who shifted from short to normal sleep, Dr. Sabia said, a pattern she believes may reflect that they slept too little at age 50 and needed more sleep later because of developing dementia.  So, if short sleep is a culprit, how can people get more Zzz's?  ''In general, sleeping pills and a lot of other things don't give you as deep of a sleep,'' Dr. Yaffe said. And ''we really want the deep sleep because that seems to be the time when things get cleared out and it's more restorative.''  She said naps are OK to catch up on missed sleep, but getting a good night's sleep should make naps unnecessary. People with sleep disorders or apnea should consult sleep specialists, she said.  For others, Dr. Lutsey said, having a regular sleep schedule, avoiding caffeine and alcohol before bedtime and removing phones and computers from the bedroom are among the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's ''sleep hygiene'' guidelines.  But much about sleep remains puzzling. The new study ''provides a pretty strong piece of evidence that sleep is important in middle age,'' Dr. Musiek said. ''But we still have a lot to learn about that and how the relationship actually occurs in people and what to do about it.''  A study that followed nearly 8,000 people in Britain for 25 years found that those who consistently reported six hours or less of sleep were more likely to develop dementia later in life. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARL-JOSEF HILDENBRAND/PICTURE ALLIANCE, VIA GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004t "
373		"    Off Camera, Portraitists Realize a Show's Vision  By Marisa Mazria-Katz  1,821 words 21 April 2021   1     In the middle of the night in a Jerusalem alleyway, a black-hatted yeshiva principal stands before a blazing mass of canvas. He has just set fire to his youngest son's paintings -- portraits of the son's deceased wife -- and he is somberly watching them burn.  Oil, it seems, is a great accelerant.  It's a Hasidic bonfire of the vanities, with a touch of 21st-century cancel culture: a distillation of artistic, cultural and Oedipal tensions at the heart of the Israeli series ''Shtisel,'' which explores the quiet intricacies of a Haredi Jewish family's ultra-Orthodox life in Jerusalem. In Season 3, which arrived to Netflix last month, Akiva's paintings -- especially the portraits of his wife, Libbi (Hadas Yaron), who died mysteriously between seasons -- are vessels for his grief, which has prevented him from moving on, much to his father's exasperation.  Suddenly the son, Akiva (Michael Aloni), wakes in a sweat: The whole thing was a dream, a grotesque allegory for his father's relentless attempts to get his son to stop acting like ''a dried-up radish'' and move on from the woman he obsessively paints.  ''My parents have always encouraged my art, and yet, there is always a tension between religious-tradition and art,'' said the series's co-creator Ori Elon, who modeled Akiva's story partly after his own experiences. (Elon, like others interviewed for this article, does not speak English as his first language; interviews were conducted by phone, video, email and text message, sometimes with the help of a translator.)  ''That tension has always been a part of my life,'' Elon added, ''and it still is.''  Art and image-making have been a contentious flash point in every season of ''Shtisel'' -- perhaps never so much as in Season 3, in which Akiva's striking canvases acquire the weight of an actual character. To capture that commanding presence, as well as Akiva's development as an artist, the creative team tapped two different Israeli artists: Menahem Halberstadt, a cartoonist and illustrator mainly for children's books, and Alex Tubis, a painter and teacher at the Bezalel Academy of Arts and Design, in Jerusalem.  Each created works that exemplified the character's talent and proclivity for dramatic colors. Akiva's first drawings in Season 1, made by Halberstadt, are of lemurs at a zoo scribbled in a notepad; later in the season, Akiva moves on to melancholic self-portraits and quasi-impressionistic oil paintings, also painted by Halberstadt.  ''Akiva has a combination of humor and childishness, along with deep and spiritual emotions,'' Halberstadt said. ''I tried to give expression to both of these sides.''  ''I think his attitude to his art changes during the first season,'' he added, ''from something that is a kind of a hobby, which he does in his spare time for his own enjoyment, to something that has emotional and spiritual significance for him.''  In Season 2, for which Tubis made the art, Akiva's work changes to include sharply rendered portraits, like one of a boy holding a goldfish in a bag. The subject confronts the viewer with a direct gaze, evoking the courtly portraits of the mid-17th century painter Diego Velázquez.  ''I think they're trying to represent some genius in a very, very high level in the series,'' Tubis said. ''He is a religious man,'' he added about Akiva, and ''God is coming to him from another place. But as I see it, he feels it through his art.''  One of the most provocative pieces of the series, painted by Tubis, is a portrait of Akiva's mother holding him as a baby, with a few strands of her hair escaping her tichel (a traditional head covering). The indiscretion infuriates Akiva's father, Shulem (Doval'e Glickman), who buys the painting from Akiva's gallerist and holds a candle threateningly to his dead wife's likeness before deciding he can't go through with it. He picks up a brush and paints over the strands instead.  But Akiva is determined and prolific. His art sets him on an unimaginable trajectory, which lands him a gallerist, international plaudits, a prime-time news interview and ultimately a big survey show at the Israel Museum. The attention would be overwhelming for any young artist but especially for Akiva, whose community is suspicious of individual achievements.  ''Success in the art world is something that is supposed to reflect a kind of self-realization, but for a Haredi, that kind of success has no meaning because things are not valued through the prism of the individual or personal success,'' said Joshua Simon, a former director and chief curator of Israel's Museums of Bat Yam and a professor at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, in Philadelphia. ''If something isn't in the service of the general good, or sustaining the religious institution, then there is no room for it.''  Making art isn't explicitly forbidden in Judaism -- the Second Commandment (''You must not make for yourself an idol of any kind or an image of anything in the heavens or on the earth or in the sea'') is interpreted variously. But as the adage goes, put two Jews in a room and you get three opinions.  Elon is familiar with the sometimes oppositional pressures. Although he isn't ultra-Orthodox, he considers himself religious and is an amateur painter. Long before he started working on ''Shtisel,'' he wrote a short film about a Haredi artist, also named Akiva. A few months later, Elon met his future co-creator, Yehonatan Indursky, who had been raised Haredi and studied in a yeshiva. Together, they adapted the concept for TV and added characters, creating the extended Shtisel family.  To fully realize that vision, they needed artists whose work would feel authentic to the context. Elon had met Halberstadt in a boys-only religious elementary school where they quickly bonded over their mutual creativity, making comics together, including what Elon described as a ''wild'' adaptation of the Book of Kings.  Later, they studied together in Jerusalem with the Moldavian painter Leonid Balaklav, whose postimpressionist style influenced them both. In Halberstadt, who is also religious, Elon saw an approach to painting that could be a surrogate for Akiva's.  ''That kind of flavor is very much born out of Menahem,'' Elon said of Akiva's style. ''They share humor, compassion and a humane point of view. Also, an acceptance of the fragility of all creatures.''  On one of the very first days filming, Halberstadt met with Aloni, who plays Akiva, to talk about how to hold a pencil, demonstrating the subtle movements of an artist's hand and showing him how to pose while painting.  ''It was pretty amazing to see how fast he got it,'' Halberstadt said. He created most drawings and paintings before heading to set. On occasion he would paint different stages of a canvas -- beginning, middle and near completion -- and then Aloni might add a brush stroke or two during the shoot.  ''Throughout the series, every season, I always have my own sketchbook -- I sketch the whole crew and cast all the time,'' Aloni said. ''I now know how to look on the painting in a different way.''  Aloni hesitated to call himself a talented visual artist just yet. ''But it's close enough for me to feel Akiva's soul and to be able to sketch people now,'' he added.  For Season 2, the creative team wanted to emphasize Akiva's stylistic and textural transformation, so they sought a new artist. When Tubis got the call, he prepared a slide show -- not of his own paintings but of works made by the British painter Peter Doig.  ''I'm telling them, 'But you know, this is somebody who is very modern today, and he's popular -- and maybe I can make something like that?''' There was an awkward silence until Dikla Barkai, an executive producer of the series, spoke up.  '''Alex, listen, we want your paintings in the show.''' Tubis recalled Barkai's having told him. ''And then I got quiet, because for me, it's like: Really? Me?''  Tubis's work moved producers, Barkai explained.  ''We looked at many painters and works, and something in Alex's paintings touched us,'' she said. ''He has something in his painting that is very emotional, and he can catch the moment.''  Tubis, who immigrated to Israel from Russia at age 12, makes work that seems to shudder with isolation, a feeling that resonates with Akiva's experience.  ''I was never at home in Israel, not until the time I became an art student,'' Tubis said. ''But even among others at art school, I've always been seen as a bit crazy and a dangerous Russian.''  ''Akiva is also different,'' Tubis added -- ''a very weird animal in his own tribe.''  Beyond its strong evocations of feeling, said James S. Snyder, the director emeritus of the Israel Museum and the executive chairman of the Jerusalem Foundation, the art this season functions as another way for Akiva to delve into his spirituality.  ''It actually connects to the Jewish culture that he comes from,'' Snyder said, ''where stories that happen in your life get interpreted through the depth of your belief and your faith.''  Israelis (and audiences worldwide) have responded enthusiastically to the series, and not only because it pulls the curtain back on an insular culture; there's a struggle for personal expression at the heart of the story that has a universal quality.  Based on interviews and anecdotes, it's an appeal to which some Haredim are themselves not immune. While television is generally considered taboo for many Haredim, it's no secret that some are watching. Halberstadt said he believed that the series's popularity was already creating a shift, however small, in some ultra-Orthodox communities, whose adherence to strict, ancient rules has always emphasized conformity.  ''Akiva is dealing with the question of individualism, even if subconsciously,'' Halberstadt said. ''On the one hand, he does not want to break away from his family and community. And on the other hand, he feels that he as an individual has a voice that he wants to give expression to.''  Michael Aloni in ''Shtisel.'' His character faces tensions between his art and his religion. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YES STUDIOS) (C1); The artist Alex Tubis, left, with works he made for the Israeli TV series ''Shtisel,'' in which a major character, Akiva, is an artist: a portrait of Akiva's wife and another of a boy holding a goldfish in a bag.; Menahem Halberstadt, right, an illustrator and cartoonist, with a charcoal sketch he produced for ''Shtisel.'' It is a rendering of an uncle of the character Akiva. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAL CHELBIN FOR THE new_york_times) (C5)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004r "
374		"    2 Searchlight Pictures Executives to Exit  By Brooks Barnes  1,444 words 21 April 2021   1     LOS ANGELES -- One of corporate Hollywood's most enduring double acts is calling it quits.  Steve Gilula and Nancy Utley, senior executives at Searchlight Pictures for 21 of its 27 years, who shaped global culture with Oscar-winning hits like ''12 Years a Slave,'' ''Black Swan,'' ''The Grand Budapest Hotel'' and ''Slumdog Millionaire,'' announced their surprise retirement on Tuesday. They will leave the Disney-owned specialty studio by the end of June, adding to a conspicuous changing of the guard at the Walt Disney Company.  ''You don't want to be the show that stays on the air two seasons too long,'' Ms. Utley said. ''Get out while everything is still going well.''  She was joking -- mostly. Searchlight has long been the gold standard of art film studios, packing its slate with diverse offerings long before Hollywood got the memo, and thriving in a changing marketplace -- the DVD collapse, the rise of streaming competitors -- even as once-formidable competitors like the Weinstein Company imploded. If the latest Searchlight success, ''Nomadland,'' wins the Academy Award for best picture on Sunday, as many expect, Mr. Gilula, 70, and Ms. Utley, 65, will have taken the top prize in four of the last eight ceremonies. That is a run unmatched by any specialty studio, even Miramax, which at its height won three best-picture Oscars.  Searchlight's previous best-picture winners included ''The Shape of Water'' (2018), ''Birdman'' (2015) and ''12 Years a Slave'' (2014). ''Slumdog Millionaire'' won in 2009.  At the same time, however, Sunday could mark a symbolic shift in Hollywood: If Searchlight loses, it will likely be to Netflix, which could win its first Academy Award for best picture for ''The Trial of the Chicago 7.'' Netflix has been chasing such a victory for years as the ultimate symbol of supremacy in Hollywood.  Searchlight has been rising to the challenge of streaming. ''Nomadland,'' from the Chinese-born filmmaker Chloé Zhao, was released in theaters and on Hulu, a Disney streaming service. But competing with Amazon, Apple and Netflix -- and their seemingly bottomless wallets -- for talent and material has become harder and harder. That has made the art film market more precarious for traditional studios like Searchlight, which will now be run by David Greenbaum and Matthew Greenfield, the current presidents.  ''Every time my contract was up, to be candid, I always questioned whether I had the intestinal fortitude to fight through the next set of changes,'' Mr. Gilula said. ''Ultimately, pride and loyalty kept me going. And there has always been another fantastic film in the pipeline. Well, maybe after 'Shape of Water,' maybe after 'Three Billboards.' But this is it. With 'Nomadland,' which has shown that we haven't lost our edge at all, adapting quickly to the pandemic, there is a great feeling of fulfillment.''  Mr. Gilula and Ms. Utley are leaving amid a broader brain drain at Disney. Robert A. Iger, executive chairman, is departing in December after 26 years at the company. Alan F. Horn, the top creative executive at Walt Disney Studios, has been edging toward retirement, as has Alan N. Braverman, Disney's top lawyer. Jayne Parker, Disney's powerful human resources chief, will step down in June after 33 years at the company.  ''The people you mentioned have contributed mightily -- myself excluded; I'm not talking about myself in this regard -- to the success of the company, and in doing so have groomed people behind them who will take over the mantle,'' Mr. Iger said. ''I try to ease people's concerns as much as possible. It's certainly way too premature to express concern.''  Searchlight was one of the assets that Disney acquired from Rupert Murdoch in 2019. Mr. Iger, who orchestrated the deal, heaped praise on Ms. Utley and Mr. Gilula. ''It takes a really deft hand to bring these smaller but extremely high-quality films to market, and they have Ph.D.s in it,'' he said.  Does their retirement signal a change in direction for Searchlight? The mini-studio, which has about 100 employees, is beloved by fans of grown-up cinema, especially as Hollywood has leaned harder toward all-audience franchise films.  ''No, not at all,'' Mr. Iger said. ''We haven't been particularly vocal about this, but we intend for Searchlight to play a big part in supplying content, not just for theaters but for our streaming platforms. We are going to invest more and more. Expect more output rather than less.''  Searchlight's coming films include ''Summer of Soul,'' a documentary about the 1969 Harlem Cultural Festival from Ahmir Thompson, better known as Questlove; Wes Anderson's ''The French Dispatch,'' a comedy-drama-romance; and Guillermo del Toro's ''Nightmare Alley,'' about a manipulative carnival worker. Searchlight also has six television shows on the way with stars and directors who include Keira Knightley, Yorgos Lanthimos (''The Favourite'') and Darren Aronofsky.  All have worked with Searchlight before.  ''When I started in the American film industry in '93-96, I heard often the word 'family' to describe film studios: 'We're a family here,''' Mr. del Toro said. ''In my experience, what they must have meant was the Manson family. But not with Searchlight. It is a true family, one that nurtures you.''  Mr. del Toro, who wrote and directed ''The Shape of Water,'' continued: ''I remember pitching them the story -- it was a huge gamble! not something most studios would make! -- and by the end I got weepy, and then they got weepy, and they said, 'Go make your movie.'''  Ms. Zhao said she was impressed that Mr. Gilula and Ms. Utley had met with her for an hour every week ''for months'' as Searchlight worked toward a pandemic-suited distribution and marketing plan for ''Nomadland,'' which stars Frances McDormand as a grief-stricken van dweller.  ''I always hear horror stories about how, at some studios, once you finish your film you don't know where it is going -- what is happening with it,'' Ms. Zhao said. ''Not only was I informed every week at Searchlight, I was allowed to be a huge part of making all of the decisions.''  Mr. Gilula and Ms. Utley agreed to a theatrical release, even though it was a money-losing proposition because of the pandemic. ''They don't say, 'We have a system that works for us, so that is how you are going to work,''' Ms. Zhao said. ''They really listened to us and trusted us.''  Searchlight was founded in 1994 by Thomas E. Rothman, who is now Sony's movie chief. At the time, specialty films -- auteur-minded cinematic trinkets -- were raking in money at the box office. ''The Full Monty,'' released by Searchlight in 1997, cost $3.5 million to make and took in $258 million worldwide (nearly $430 million in today's money). Over the years, market conditions changed markedly, particularly in the late 2000s, when an economic downturn dried up production financing.  As competitors like Rogue Pictures, Paramount Vantage, Picturehouse and Miramax faded away, Ms. Utley and Mr. Gilula kept Searchlight vibrant. Her specialty has been marketing, scripts and casting. He is a distribution ace who co-founded the Landmark Theaters chain in 1974.  ''There has never been a spreadsheet that Steve didn't love,'' Ms. Utley said dryly.  Aside from exquisite cinematic taste, the two executives, who both hail from the Midwest, are the rarest of species in Hollywood: genuinely nice people. Neither craves the spotlight. They are widely known in the film industry for campaigning for awards with integrity.  ''Hopefully, we have set an example,'' Mr. Gilula said, ''showing that you don't have to be the other kind of person to be successful in this business.''  Both insisted that Disney's takeover of Searchlight (called Fox Searchlight while owned by Mr. Murdoch) had played no role in their decision to retire.  ''We were frustrated at Fox because Fox just didn't have a streaming strategy and was very slow to react to marketplace changes,'' Ms. Utley said, adding, ''I think the transition to Disney has gone really smoothly, which is one reason I have all the faith in the world about the future of Searchlight.''  ''It is a true family, one that nurtures you,'' the director Guillermo del Toro said of Searchlight under Nancy Utley and Steve Gilula, left. ''Nomadland,'' directed by Chloé Zhao, above left, is an Oscar favorite. ''The Grand Budapest Hotel,'' below, is one of many award-winning Searchlight films. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SEARCHLIGHT PICTURES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS; ELIZABETH WEINBERG FOR THE new_york_times; MARTIN SCALI/FOX SEARCHLIGHT PICTURES) (B5)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004q "
375		"    The Verdicts  By Emily Bazelon  105 words 21 April 2021   15     SECOND-DEGREE MURDER: GUILTY  Causing the death of a human being, without intent, while committing or attempting to commit an assault.  THIRD-DEGREE MURDER: GUILTY  Unintentionally causing a death by committing an act that is eminently dangerous to other persons while exhibiting a depraved mind, with reckless disregard for human life.  MANSLAUGHTER: GUILTY  Creating an unreasonable risk, by consciously taking the chance of causing death or great bodily harm to someone else.  Crowds gathered outside the Hennepin County Government Center in Minneapolis on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amr Alfiky/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00042 "
376		"    Withdrawal Will Erode Intelligence, General Says  By Eric Schmitt  1,088 words 21 April 2021   8     The military is examining where it can reposition troops to prevent Afghanistan from once again becoming a terrorist base.  WASHINGTON -- The top American commander in the Middle East said on Tuesday that it would be ''extremely difficult'' for the United States to watch and counter terrorist threats in Afghanistan like Al Qaeda after American troops leave the country by Sept. 11.  The head of the U.S. Central Command, Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., offered the first extensive comments by a top commander about the effect of President Biden's decision to withdraw more than 2,500 American troops from Afghanistan. Mr. Biden rejected the advice of top Pentagon and military advisers to keep a small force in place.  Among the major challenges once troops have left will be how to track and potentially attack militant groups in Afghanistan, a landlocked nation far from any major American base. General McKenzie said the administration was discussing with other countries where it could reposition forces to prevent Afghanistan from again becoming a terrorist base.  Possibilities in the region include Tajikistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, but those countries are under the sway of Russia to one degree or another, and the sanctions the administration imposed on Moscow last week complicates any such discussions, diplomats and military officials said.  Attack planes aboard aircraft carriers and long-range bombers flying from land bases along the Persian Gulf, Indian Ocean and even in the United States could strike insurgent fighters spotted by armed surveillance drones. But the long distances are costly and riskier.  ''It's going to be extremely difficult to do, but it is not impossible,'' General McKenzie said under questioning from both Democrats and Republicans on the House Armed Services Committee.  General McKenzie told lawmakers that he was working on a detailed set of alternatives that he would deliver to Defense Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III by month's end. But he underscored what Mr. Biden's top intelligence officials have already warned: Without boots on the ground or armed surveillance drones just minutes away, the United States will have far fewer human or electronic eyes and ears focused on extremist threats in Afghanistan.  ''The intelligence will decline,'' General McKenzie said, ''but we're going to be able to continue to look into Afghanistan.''  American spy agencies do not believe Al Qaeda or other terrorist groups pose an immediate threat to strike the United States from Afghanistan, an assessment that the Biden administration considered pivotal as it weighed continuing the war or pulling out forces this year.  Al Qaeda and the Islamic State's Afghanistan branch remain very weak inside the country, according to American officials briefed on the intelligence. Islamic State fighters in Afghanistan are focused on making local gains, not mounting international attacks. And the Taliban remains hostile to the group.  How well the United States can monitor any changes in these threats will depend on many factors, General McKenzie and other senior military officials said.  The administration currently plans to maintain an embassy in Kabul -- but how many personnel, including intelligence analysts, will remain is under debate. ''That will be helpful if we maintain an embassy there,'' General McKenzie said.  Flying remotely piloted aircraft like the MQ-9 Reaper from the sprawling Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar requires round trips of up to eight hours, leaving much less time for drones to hover over targets in Afghanistan. As a result, the Pentagon would need many more drones to achieve 24-hour coverage in multiple areas of the country at a time when the Defense Department is looking to transfer surveillance aircraft to missions in Asia.  General McKenzie said that the military would not sacrifice precision in its targeting to minimize the risk of civilian casualties. ''We're going to make sure we have a precise target, and that we're going to be able to control what happens there,'' he said.  The implications of Mr. Biden's decision continued to sink in on Capitol Hill on Tuesday.  Several top Biden administration officials, including Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Zalmay Khalilzad, the longtime lead U.S. diplomat involved in the Afghan peace process, provided classified briefings on Tuesday to several socially distanced groups of lawmakers, and discussed the president's decision.  General McKenzie made one point clear in his public testimony: No more combat troops. And no more civilian contractors. (There are more than 16,000 in Afghanistan, including about 6,000 Americans.) ''We're going to go to zero in Afghanistan,'' he said.  Representative Michael Waltz, a Florida Republican who served in Afghanistan as an Army Green Beret, expressed concern with the lack of ready-to-go alternative bases. ''General, do think it would have been optimal to have those agreements before we announced to the world that we're going to zero in a few months?'' Mr. Waltz asked.  General McKenzie said talks with other nations in the region were underway.  Administration officials said they were considering basing drone operations in Central Asian countries, including Uzbekistan, whose Karshi-Khanabad base was a logistics hub for operations in Afghanistan until Uzbek officials ordered the United States to leave in 2005 in protest over a United Nations operation to relocate Uzbek refugees who had fled during an uprising earlier in the year.  Akhror Burkhanov, a spokesman for the Uzbek Embassy in Washington, said he was unaware of any current discussions about possible basing arrangements.  The C.I.A. once flew drone missions out of Shamsi airfield in Baluchistan Province in Pakistan, which has expressed support for the Afghan peace process. But many American and Pakistani analysts say it is highly unlikely Prime Minister Imran Khan would approve any basing arrangements given the fraught history of C.I.A. drone strikes in Pakistan's tribal regions.  General McKenzie, as well as other military and intelligence officials, noted the advances in surveillance technology since Sept. 11, 2001, as well as myriad ways that the United States had hardened its defenses at home from external terrorist attacks.  ''It's a very different country,'' he said, ''than it was in the fall of 2001.''  Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., the head of the U.S. Central Command,  in 2019. His remarks on Tuesday were the first extensive comments by a top commander about the effect of President Biden's decision. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mazen Mahdi/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003y "
377		"    Putin Signals West Faces Harder Line From Russia  By Anton Troianovski  1,394 words 21 April 2021   10     With an air of moral superiority, the Russian president seems intent on teaching President Biden and other Western leaders a lesson.  KYIV, Ukraine -- The world according to President Vladimir V. Putin looks like this: Russia is on the rise while the West is in chaos.  The West, spurred on by a new American president who is more anti-Russian than his predecessor, seeks Russia's -- and Mr. Putin's -- destruction.  And it is time for Russia, imbued with a moral authority and a thinning supply of patience, to hit back.  ''They may think that we are like them, but we are different, with a different genetic, cultural and moral code,'' Mr. Putin said last month, excoriating the United States. ''We know how to defend our interests.''  As he masses troops near Ukraine, puts down domestic dissent and engages in a fast-intensifying conflict with President Biden, Mr. Putin is on the verge of decisions that could define a new, even harder-line phase of his presidency. On Wednesday, Mr. Putin is scheduled to deliver his annual state-of-the-nation address, a speech that could shed light on just how far he is prepared to escalate tensions with the West.  Now in his third decade in power, Mr. Putin, 68, appears more convinced than ever of his special, historic role as the father of a reborn Russian nation, fighting at home and abroad against a craven, hypocritical, morally decaying West.  ''This sense of superiority mixed with arrogance gives him a feeling of power, and this is dangerous,'' said Tatiana Stanovaya, a Russian analyst who has studied Mr. Putin for years. ''When you think you are more powerful and more wise than everyone else around you, you think you have a certain historical mandate for more wide-ranging action.''  Mr. Putin has made moves in recent weeks that, even by his standards, signal an escalation in his conflict with those he perceives as his enemies, foreign and domestic. Russian prosecutors last week filed suit to outlaw the organization of the opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny, a step that could result in the most intense wave of political repression in post-Soviet Russia. In Russia's southwest, Mr. Putin has massed some 100,000 troops -- a force, the Kremlin has indicated, that could be prepared to move into neighboring Ukraine.  Mr. Putin's opponents have called for protests across the country on Wednesday in support of Mr. Navalny, who his allies say is on a hunger strike and near death in a Russian prison. The protests are likely to be forcefully broken up by the police.  To his critics and much of the outside world, Mr. Putin's recent actions look like paranoia. But to his supporters and to analysts who follow him closely, his moves have a certain internal logic -- revolving around the conviction that the West seeks to weaken Russia and that Mr. Putin is integral to its strength.  The election of Mr. Biden, despite his promise to be tough on Russia, initially gave the Kremlin hope, analysts say. He was seen as more professional, reliable and pragmatic than President Donald J. Trump, with a worldview shaped by a Cold War era of diplomacy in which Washington and Moscow engaged as equal superpowers with a responsibility for global security. In their first phone call in January, Mr. Biden and Mr. Putin agreed to extend the New Start arms-control treaty, a Russian foreign policy goal that the Kremlin had failed to achieve with Mr. Trump.  Then came the television interview in March in which Mr. Biden assented when asked whether Mr. Putin was a ''killer.'' A month later, that moment -- to which Russian officials and commentators responded with a squall of prime-time-televised, anti-American fury -- looks like a turning point. It was followed by last week's raft of American sanctions against Russia, combined with Mr. Biden's call for a summit meeting with Mr. Putin, which to many Russians looked like a crude American attempt to negotiate from a position of strength.  ''This is seen as an unacceptable situation -- you won't chase us into the stall with sanctions,'' said Dmitri Trenin, director of the Carnegie Moscow Center think tank.  Russia built up troops near the Ukrainian border, claiming it was responding to heightened military activity by NATO and Kyiv. And it stepped up the pressure on Mr. Navalny, whom the Kremlin sees as an agent of American influence, culminating in last Friday's filing by prosecutors to declare his organization ''extremist'' and illegal.  The extremism designation against Mr. Navalny's organization, which a Moscow court will consider in a secret trial starting next week, would effectively force Russia's most potent opposition movement underground and could result in yearslong prison terms for pro-Navalny activists.  Mr. Navalny, meanwhile, remains on hunger strike in a Russian prison hospital, insisting he be allowed to be seen by doctors of his choosing. A lawyer who visited him, Vadim Kobzev, reported Tuesday that Mr. Navalny's arms were punctured and bruised after three nurses tried and failed six times to hook him up to an intravenous drip.  ''If you saw me now, you would laugh,'' said a letter from Mr. Navalny his team posted to social media. ''A skeleton walking, swaying, in its cell.''  The White House has warned the Russian government it ''will be held accountable'' if Mr. Navalny dies in prison. Western officials -- and Mr. Navalny's supporters and allies -- reject the idea that the opposition leader is acting on another country's behalf.  But in the Kremlin's logic, Mr. Navalny is a threat to Russian statehood, doing the West's bidding by undermining Mr. Putin. It is Mr. Putin, Mr. Trenin said, who is keeping Russia stable by maintaining a balance between competing factions in Russia's ruling elite.  ''If Putin leaves, a battle between different groups breaks out, and Russia withdraws into itself, has no time for the rest of the world and no longer gets in anyone's way,'' Mr. Trenin said. ''The West is, of course, using Navalny, and will use him to create problems for Putin and, in the longer term, help Putin become history in one way or another.''  How far Mr. Putin goes in striking back against the West's real or imagined hostility is still an open question. In the state news media, the mood music is dire. On the flagship weekly news show on the Rossiya 1 channel Sunday, the host Dmitri Kiselyov closed a segment on Mr. Putin's showdown with Mr. Biden by reminding viewers of Poseidon -- a new weapon in Russia's nuclear arsenal that Mr. Putin revealed three years ago.  ''Russia's armed forces are ready to test-fire a nuclear torpedo that would cause radioactive tsunamis capable of flooding enemy cities and making them uninhabitable for decades,'' a translation of a Danish newspaper report intoned.  Still, there are signs that Mr. Putin does not want tensions with the West to spiral out of control.  As Europe and the United States scrambled to assess the Russian troop buildup in late March, Russia's top military officer, Gen. Valery V. Gerasimov, spoke on the phone with his American counterpart, Gen. Mark A. Milley. On Monday, Nikolai Patrushev, secretary of Mr. Putin's Security Council, discussed the prospect of a presidential summit with Jake Sullivan, Mr. Biden's national security adviser. And the Kremlin said this week that Mr. Putin would speak at Mr. Biden's online climate change meeting on Thursday.  Ms. Stanovaya, the analyst, says she is convinced that Mr. Putin himself is more interested than his hawkish advisers in looking for ways to work with the United States. She explained her view by pointing to Mr. Putin's determination to return Russia to the ranks of great powers.  ''Putin very much believes in his mission as a great, historic figure with responsibility not only for Russia, but also for global security,'' Ms. Stanovaya said. ''He doesn't understand how it is that the American president doesn't feel the same way.''  A Ukrainian Army convoy near Khlibodarivka in eastern Ukraine on Monday. Russia has built up a force of 100,000 at the border. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN HOFFMAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004p "
378		"   SQUARE FEET  As Americans Stock Up, Cold Storage Takes Off  By Martha C. White  1,320 words 21 April 2021   7     Companies are seeking to build, buy or invest in the sector, despite construction costs that are roughly triple that of an ordinary warehouse.  Americans have treated their freezers a bit like security blankets over the past year, stuffing them full of staples and indulgences, a consumer behavior pattern that has had ripple effects beyond the walls of their kitchens.  Developers that focus on cold storage facilities say they are seeing growing interest from companies seeking to build, buy or invest in the sector, despite construction costs that are roughly triple that of an ordinary warehouse.  Americold, a logistics company focused on the cold storage supply chain, reported that its revenue grew 11.4 percent in 2020 from the previous year.  ''We gave guidance pre-Covid for our 2020 year, and we're one of the few companies that didn't lift or change that guidance,'' said Fred Boehler, chief executive of Americold, which added 46 facilities to its portfolio through a $1.74 billion acquisition of Agro Merchants Group last year. ''What we eat and where we eat will change, but we're going to eat.''  Where we eat has shifted overwhelmingly to our own kitchens and living rooms, and what we eat increasingly comes from the freezer.  ''People were very nervous not just about getting to a store, but what was going to happen with the supply chain,'' said Jill Standish, global head of the retail practice at consulting firm Accenture. She added that a survey in March 2020, the month the World Health Organization declared the pandemic, found that about one-third of American shoppers were buying more frozen food than normal.  Even though the food supply chain issues that characterized the early days of the pandemic have largely abated, Americans are still stocking up.  ''Consumption of frozen or prepared meals was already on the rise leading into Covid,'' said Beth Bloom, associate director of food and drink reports at the market research firm Mintel. The pandemic supercharged that trend, as restaurants shuttered and Americans stopped commuting to work and school.  Some people are motivated by the desire to avoid crowds: In a recent Mintel survey, 57 percent of respondents said they tried to limit the amount of time spent in stores -- and 36 percent said they were still stockpiling groceries or household supplies.  ''They want to stock up more so they can go less frequently,'' Ms. Bloom said.  The widespread migration of the white-collar work force from downtown office towers and suburban corporate campuses into their homes is another key part of the dynamic.  ''You're talking about a lot of people that are going to need to fend for themselves at home in situations where they haven't before, mainly lunchtime,'' Ms. Bloom said.  The industry had to make large, rapid adjustments to accommodate these changes taking place in millions of homes across the country.  ''This whole idea of food handling and cold storage in an e-commerce world is really different than it was in the past,'' Ms. Standish said. ''Instead of central locations of huge warehouses that have a long way to go to deliver, we're seeing a lot of micro-fulfillment centers.''  Increasing demand for cold storage at the last-mile stage of distribution -- that is, near where people live -- was rising before the pandemic. It accelerated when lockdown orders shut restaurants and food service operations, and Americans stuck at home turned to online grocery shopping en masse.  ''The immediate change in consumer behavior due to Covid has caused companies to change how they service those demands,'' said Art Rasmussen, a senior vice president at CBRE, a real estate investment and services firm. ''Covid has accelerated the online growth by several years, and the infrastructure wasn't quite ready to take on that capacity.''  Building near population centers is logical, but not necessarily easy or cheap. ''Traditionally, people shied away from it because it was capital intensive,'' said Tim O'Rourke, managing director at real estate research and services firm JLL.  ''Supply and demand are very tight in this industry and always have been,'' said Mr. Boehler, the Americold chief. Demand in particular for cold storage catering to the retail sector boomed during the pandemic. ''Overnight, it went up 40 percent in terms of demand,'' he said.  Building cold storage space can cost $150 per square foot, about three times as much as that of conventional warehouse space, so the ''if you build it, they will come'' development model used for other types of industrial real estate -- typically referred to in the industry as building ''on spec'' -- has not been financially feasible. Shovels go into the ground only after tenants have committed and leases have been signed. The upshot is tighter supply, when companies need a lot more of this space quickly.  Converting existing warehouses generally is not an option. Paradoxically, given that they are constructed to store goods in subzero conditions, cold-storage warehouses need heated floors. Mr. O'Rourke said the intensity of the cold generated by industrial-strength refrigeration equipment can seep into the ground, creating an artificial permafrost. When that frozen ground expands, it is likely to warp a building's foundation.  Cold-storage facilities require numerous other specialized construction elements to meet safety regulations and manufacturers' quality standards.  ''If you have your ice cream you just bought and bring it home, what happens at the end of the week to that ice cream?'' Mr. Boehler said. ''It's got crystals, it's got a weird coating. The product itself starts to break down.  ''Your freezer at home is meant to protect those goods for a couple of weeks,'' he added. ''Our freezers are designed and insulated to hold those same products for months and months.''  This means keeping goods much, much colder than in an ordinary household freezer. Roofs and walls are all heavily insulated. Doors are all tightly sealed and fitted with high-speed motors to keep cold air from escaping. As all of us who have been scolded for leaving the freezer door open know, those moments of contact with the outside world drive up utility costs quickly.  ''It's all about maintaining a very, very tight tolerance of temperature around whatever we're storing,'' Mr. Boehler said.  In spite of the high capital requirements, Mr. O'Rourke of JLL said more commercial real estate investors were embracing cold storage. ''There's lots of capital flowing into the space,'' he said.  Cold storage sales volume rose 22 percent in 2020 on a year-over-year basis, while the broader industrial sector dropped 11 percent and all commercial real estate plummeted 29 percent, according to data from Real Capital Analytics.  The category is becoming more popular because operators can charge a premium, and sector performance has weathered the coronavirus storm better than other types of properties like hotels, offices and malls.  That, in turn, is leading to more developers bucking convention and building cold storage facilities on spec, Mr. O'Rourke said. ''There are actually more speculative cold storage projects in the U.S.,'' he said.  ''A lot of the speculative cold storage projects are being built in population growth centers because they're highly divisible,'' he said. Subsections can have varying temperature ranges so fish sticks, fennel and fresh flowers can all be stored under the same roof.  ''We're all getting used to convenience now, and the way we think about e-commerce has now entered the food world,'' he added.  Top, a cold storage facility in Atlanta owned by Americold, a logistics company whose revenue grew 11.4 percent in 2020 from the previous year. Companies are seeking to build, buy or invest in the cold storage industry as consumers fill their freezers in the pandemic. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AMERICOLD; AMY LOMBARD FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003u "
379		"    Caving to Islamists, Pakistan Weighs Expelling French Envoy  By Mujib Mashal and Zia ur-Rehman  1,133 words 21 April 2021   8     Just a week ago, the government declared Tehreek-e-Labaik Pakistan a terrorist group. But after violent protests spurred by the publication of caricatures in France, the government acquiesced to the Islamist party's demands.  Pakistan's Parliament on Tuesday began debates on a resolution calling for the expulsion of France's ambassador, a move widely seen as a capitulation by the government to a militant Islamist party that has led large protests and clashed with the police.  The resolution proposed by the government illustrates how deeply unsettled Prime Minister Imran Khan's administration feels amid a reeling economy, a new wave of coronavirus infections and spreading social unrest. It also suggests the party, Tehreek-e-Labaik Pakistan, which has capitalized on public anger over the publication of caricatures depicting the Prophet Muhammad in France, could pose a major threat to Pakistan's stability.  Just a week ago, the government declared Tehreek-e-Labaik a terrorist group and banned it. At least four police officers have been killed in clashes with the group, and at least 11 officers have at one point been taken hostage. Police officials acknowledged the death of three protesters, but the party claims that a larger number of their supporters have been killed.  Intermittent protests since last winter were sparked by President Emmanuel Macron of France, who last year gave a defiant eulogy for a French teacher who was murdered after showing caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad in a classroom. Mr. Macron said the teacher, Samuel Paty, was killed ''because the Islamists want our future and they know that with quiet heroes like him they will never have it.''  That provoked members of Tehreek-e-Labaik, which sees itself as a protector of Islam's honor at home and abroad. The party has built a wide base of support in recent years, rallying around cases of perceived blasphemy, which is punishable by death in Pakistan.  The protests intensified after the government last week arrested Saad Hussain Rizvi, the party's 26-year old leader, in a pre-emptive move to scuttle his calls for large gatherings.  In a deal reached in November to call off similar protests, Mr. Khan's government agreed to hold a parliamentary vote on the expulsion of the French ambassador. In an effort to hold the government to the agreement, the group returned to the streets last week. Soon after the government declared the group a terrorist organization, it found itself in the awkward position of negotiating with it.  Pakistan has long struggled with militant groups on the margins. The Pakistani Taliban, for instance, has waged an insurgency from the vast tribal areas bordering Afghanistan.  Tehreek-e-Labaik poses a thornier challenge. It draws its support from the Barelvi school of Islam, to which a majority of Pakistanis belong.  It has shown it can mobilize large crowds to major urban centers by targeting emotional issues like protecting the honor of the Prophet Muhammad. The group's main rallying cry has been to call for decapitation as the only response to those who disrespect the Prophet.  With their anti-blasphemy campaigns, the party seems to have drawn such wide appeal that even the Pakistani Taliban and its allied groups, who in the past killed Barelvi leaders and bombed Sufi shrines associated with them, recently announced support for the Tahreek-e-Labaik protests.  ''We stand with those who sacrificed their lives for the honor of the Prophet,'' the Pakistani Taliban in a statement, advising that ''armed struggle against them is the only solution.''  Tahreek-e-Labaik first came to prominence as an organized force when it protested for the release of Mumtaz Qadri, a bodyguard who in 2011 gunned down his own boss, Salman Taseer, the sitting governor of Punjab Province. At the time, Mr. Taseer sought justice for a Christian woman who had been jailed on dubious charges of blasphemy.  Mr. Qadri was eventually sentenced and hanged in 2016, but the group tried to free him by justifying his killing of Mr. Taseer. Since then, it has shaped itself into a political party contesting elections and continuing to unsettle governments.  On Tuesday, it was clear Mr. Khan's government had made some concessions to the group, while trying to give itself political cover by putting the ambassador's expulsion to a vote in Parliament.  Sheikh Rashid Ahmad, Pakistan's interior minister, said the 11 police officers who were taken hostage during the week of protests had been released. He also said that Tehreek-e-Labaik had pledged to call off a nationwide protest while the government offered the resolution to assuage their demand for the French ambassador to be expelled. Local media also reported that Mr. Rizvi, the party's leader, had been set free, but it could not be confirmed officially.  ''After long negotiations between the government of Pakistan and Tehreek-e-Labaik, it has been agreed that the government will present a resolution on the expulsion of the French ambassador to the National Assembly today,'' Mr. Ahmad said in a video message early on Tuesday.  Mr. Ahmad said that, as part of the agreement, any judicial proceedings against the members of the group would also be scrapped. The National Assembly, Pakistan's legislature, which was not scheduled to meet on Tuesday, announced a special session for the afternoon to take up the expulsion resolution.  At the legislature, lawmakers could not agree on a way forward, and the session was adjourned until Friday when the issue of expelling the French ambassador would be taken up again.  Instead, the session turned into a virtual competition among lawmakers, with many standing to give speeches testifying to their piety and devotion. The speaker of the house repeatedly urged members that the issue was ''sensitive'' and that the sides shouldn't politic over it.  According to Pakistan's Center for Social Justice, a Lahore-based human rights group, at least 1,855 people have been charged under the blasphemy laws between 1987 and February 2021, with 2020 marking the highest number of accusations. (The data does not include the targeted killings of members of sects considered heretic or apostate without leveling any allegations.)  Opposition groups were critical of the prime minister for what they described as holding the parliament hostage by forcing it to take up the resolution in order to soothe Tahreek-e-Labaik. Bilawal Zardari Bhutto, the leader of Pakistan Peoples Party, boycotted the session.  ''It's your mess, prime minister,'' he said on Twitter. ''Clean up or go home.''  Supporters of Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan holding placards and shouting slogans at a protest in Lahore, Pakistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004m "
380		"    Dilemma for the U.S.: China's Solar Sway  By Ana Swanson and Brad Plumer  1,941 words 21 April 2021   1     President Biden's vow to work with China on issues like climate change is clashing with his promise to defend human rights.  WASHINGTON -- President Biden has repeatedly pledged to work with China on issues like climate change while challenging Beijing on human rights and unfair trade practices.  But those goals are now coming into conflict in the global solar sector, presenting the Biden administration with a tough choice as it looks to expand the use of solar power domestically to reduce the United States' carbon dioxide emissions.  The dilemma stems from an uncomfortable reality: China dominates the global supply chain for solar power, producing the vast majority of the materials and parts for solar panels that the United States relies on for clean energy. And there is emerging evidence that some of China's biggest solar companies have worked with the Chinese government to absorb minority workers in the far western region of Xinjiang, programs often seen as a red flag for potential forced labor and human rights abuses.  This week, Mr. Biden is inviting world leaders to a climate summit in Washington, where he is expected to unveil an ambitious plan for cutting America's emissions over the next decade. The administration is already eyeing a goal of generating 100 percent of the nation's electricity from carbon-free sources such as solar, wind or nuclear power by 2035, up from only 40 percent last year. To meet that target, the United States may need to more than double its annual pace of solar installations.  That is likely to be an economic boon to China, since the United States still relies almost entirely on Chinese manufacturers for low-cost solar modules, many of which are imported from Chinese-owned factories in Vietnam, Malaysia and Thailand.  China also supplies many of the key components in solar panels, including more than 80 percent of the world's polysilicon, a raw material that most solar panels use to absorb energy from sunlight. Nearly half of the global supply comes from Xinjiang alone. In 2019, less than 5 percent of the world's polysilicon came from U.S.-owned companies.  ''It's put the Democrats in a hard position,'' said Francine Sullivan, the vice president for business development at REC Silicon, a polysilicon maker based in Norway with factories in the United States. ''Do you want to stand up to human rights in China, or do you want cheap solar panels?''  The administration is increasingly under pressure from influential supporters not to turn a blind eye to potential human rights abuses in order to achieve its climate goals.  ''As the U.S. seeks to address climate change, we must not allow the Chinese Communist Party to use forced labor to meet our nation's needs,'' Richard L. Trumka, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., wrote in a letter on March 12 urging the Biden administration to block imports of solar products containing polysilicon from the Xinjiang region.  China's hold over the global solar sector has its roots in the late 2000s. As part of an effort to reduce dependence on foreign energy, Beijing pumped vast amounts of money into solar technology, enabling companies to make multibillion-dollar investments in new factories and gain market share globally.  China's boom in production caused the price of panels to plummet, accelerating the adoption of solar power worldwide while forcing dozens of companies in the United States, Europe and elsewhere out of business.  In the past few years, Chinese polysilicon manufacturers have increasingly shifted to Xinjiang, lured by abundant coal and cheap electricity for their energy-intensive production.  Xinjiang is now notorious as the site of a vast program of detention and surveillance that the Chinese government has carried out against Muslim Uyghurs and other minority groups. Human rights groups say the Chinese authorities may have detained a million or more minorities in camps and other sites where they face torture, indoctrination and coerced labor.  In a report last year, Horizon Advisory, a consultancy in Washington, cited Chinese news reports and government announcements suggesting that major Chinese solar companies including GCL-Poly, East Hope Group, Daqo New Energy, Xinte Energy and Jinko Solar had accepted workers transferred with the help of the Chinese government from impoverished parts of Xinjiang.  Jinko Solar denied those allegations, as did the Chinese government. Zhang Longgen, a vice chairman of Xinjiang Daqo -- a unit of one of the companies cited by Horizon Advisory -- said that the polysilicon plants were not labor intensive, and that the company's workers were freely employed and could quit if they wanted, according to Global Times, a Chinese Communist Party-owned newspaper. The report said that only 18 of the 1,934 workers at Xinjiang Daqo belonged to ethnic minorities, and that none were Uyghur.  The other companies did not respond to requests for comment.  Experts have had difficulty estimating how many laborers may have been coerced into working in Chinese solar facilities given restrictions on travel and reporting in Xinjiang. Many multinational companies have also struggled to gain access to the region's factories to rule out the risk of forced labor in their supply chains.  Mark Widmar, the chief executive of First Solar, a solar panel maker based in the United States, said exposure to Xinjiang was ''the unfortunate reality for most of the industry.''  ''How the industry has evolved, it's made it difficult to be comfortable that you do not have some form of exposure,'' he said. ''If you try to follow the spaghetti through the spaghetti bowl and really understand where your exposure is, that's going to be tough.''  The revelations have attracted attention from lawmakers and customs officials, and prompted concerns among solar investors that the sector could be destined for tougher regulation.  Under the Trump administration, American customs agents took a harder line against products reportedly made with forced labor in Xinjiang, including a sweeping ban on cotton and tomatoes from the region. Those restrictions have forced a reorganization of global supply chains, especially in the apparel sector.  The Biden administration has said it is still reviewing the Trump administration's policies, and it has not yet signaled whether it will pursue other bans on products or companies. But both Mr. Biden and his advisers have insisted that the United States plans to confront China on human rights abuses in Xinjiang.  A spokeswoman for the National Security Council said that the draconian treatment of Uyghurs ''cannot be ignored,'' and that the administration was ''studying ways to effectively ensure that we are not importing products made from forced labor,'' including solar products.  Congress may also step in. Since the beginning of the year, the House and Senate have reintroduced versions of the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which would assume that imports from Xinjiang were made with forced labor and block them from American ports, unless the importer showed proof otherwise. The House version of the bill singles out polysilicon as a priority for enforcement.  The legislation has broad bipartisan support and could be included in a sweeping China-related bill that Democrats hope to introduce this year, according to congressional staff members.  Amid the threat of new restrictions, the Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade group, has led an effort to help solar companies trace materials in their supply chain. It has also organized a pledge of 236 companies to oppose forced labor and encouraged companies to sever any ties with Xinjiang by June.  Some Chinese companies have responded by reshuffling their supply chains, funneling polysilicon and other solar products they manufacture outside Xinjiang to American buyers, and then directing their Xinjiang-made products to China and other markets.  Analysts say this kind of reorganization is, in theory, feasible. About 35 percent of the world's polysilicon comes from regions in China other than Xinjiang, while the United States and the European Union together make up around 30 percent of global solar panel demand, according to Johannes Bernreuter, a polysilicon market analyst at Bernreuter Research.  John Smirnow, the general counsel for the Solar Energy Industries Association, said most solar companies were already well on their way toward extricating supply chains from Xinjiang.  ''Our understanding is that all the major suppliers are going to be able to supply assurances to their customers that their products coming into the U.S. do not include polysilicon from the region,'' he said.  But it is unclear if this reorganization will quell criticism. Episodes of forced labor have also been reported in Chinese facilities outside Xinjiang where Uyghurs and other minorities have been transferred to work. And restrictions on products from Xinjiang could spread to markets including Canada, Britain and Australia, which are debating new rules and guidelines.  Human rights advocates have argued that allowing Chinese companies to cleave their supply chains to serve American and non-American buyers may do little to improve conditions in Xinjiang and have pressed the Biden administration for stronger action.  ''The message has to be clear to the Chinese government that this economic model is not going to be supported by governments or businesses,'' said Cathy Feingold, the director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s International Department.  Chinese companies are also facing pressure from Beijing not to accede to American demands, since that could be seen as a tacit criticism of the government's activities in Xinjiang.  In a statement in January, the China Photovoltaic Industry Association and China Nonferrous Metals Industry Association condemned ''irresponsible statements'' from U.S. industries, which they said were directed at curbing Xinjiang's development and ''meddling in Chinese domestic affairs.''  ''It is widely known that the 'forced labor' issue is in its entirety the lie of the century that the United States and certain other Western countries have concocted from nothing,'' they said.  On Monday, Secretary of State Antony Blinken warned that the United States was falling behind China on clean energy production.  But bringing solar manufacturing back to the United States could be a challenge, analysts said, given the time needed to significantly bolster American production, and it could also raise the price of solar panels in the short term.  The United States still has a handful of facilities for manufacturing polysilicon, but they have faced grim prospects since 2013, when China put retaliatory tariffs on American polysilicon. Hemlock Semiconductor mothballed a new $1.2 billion facility in Tennessee in 2014, while REC Silicon shut its polysilicon facility in Washington in 2019.  China has promised to carry out large purchases of American polysilicon as part of a trade deal signed last year, but those transactions have not materialized.  In the near term, tensions over Xinjiang could be a boon for the few remaining U.S. suppliers. Ms. Sullivan said some small U.S. solar developers had reached out to REC Silicon in recent months to inquire about non-Chinese products.  But American companies need the promise of reliable, long-term orders to scale up, she said, adding that when she explains the limited supply of solar products that do not touch China, people become ''visibly ill.''  ''This is the big lesson,'' Ms. Sullivan added. ''You become dependent on China, and what does it mean? We have to swallow our values in order to do solar.''  Chris Buckley contributed reporting.  Chris Buckley contributed reporting.  A high-security complex that is believed to be a re-education camp in the Xinjiang region of China in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GREG BAKER/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B6)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003x "
381		"    Homeless L.G.B.T.Q. Youth Look for Freedom, and Jobs, in New York  By Michael Gold  1,340 words 21 April 2021   23     A new city program for homeless L.G.B.T.Q. youth will offer job placement, education and mental health support to help them achieve career success.  It was late March, and Mario Smith was staring at an uncertain future.  Mx. Smith, a 20-year-old immigrant from Jamaica who identifies as transgender and nonbinary, was nearing the end of an internship and preparing to plunge into a job market that, even before the pandemic, offered limited opportunities for people like them.  Even in New York City, where young people like Mx. Smith have flocked for decades in search of the freedom to live openly, long-established prejudices about gender identity and sexuality can still be a barrier to professional success.  Finding an inclusive workplace would be important in ways that were both obvious and intimate. Would employers recognize and respect Mx. Smith's identity, and make sure co-workers did the same? And would bosses be supportive as Mx. Smith, who was taking hormones, went through something akin to a second puberty?  ''It can be so hard to navigate that while also being in the workplace,'' Mx. Smith said.  This summer, New York City will start an employment development program meant to address the needs of people like Mx. Smith, who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or intersex and are homeless or at risk of homelessness.  The program will arrive in the middle of a turbulent moment for L.G.B.T.Q. children in the United States -- especially transgender ones. After a Supreme Court decision guaranteed L.G.B.T.Q. people protection from workplace discrimination, state lawmakers around the country have sought to restrict transgender children's rights and medical care.  Most such rights have already been acknowledged in New York City, and state lawmakers have taken steps in recent years to address gaps, like barring discrimination based on ''gender identity or expression'' and repealing the so-called ''walking while trans'' law.  But many in the L.G.B.T.Q. community say that workplaces have yet to become truly inclusive, and studies show large gaps in hiring and wages. The disparity is particularly pronounced for homeless and runaway youth, like Mx. Smith, who enter the job market with disadvantages that can leave them in dire economic positions.  City officials say the program, Unity Works, goes beyond job training and knits together a number of services in order to meet the needs of a vulnerable population poorly served by federally funded programs.  ''The level of support and the resources that young people are getting in this program doesn't exist in any other program for young people in this country that I've seen,'' said Ashe McGovern, the executive director of the Unity Project, the city's initiative focused on L.G.B.T.Q. young adults.  When the program begins July 1, it will connect 90 people between 16 and 24 years old with jobs or paid internships at businesses committed to fostering inclusive work environments. It will provide two years of job training and placement, assistance accessing social services, educational support and mental-health resources, with an additional year of follow-up support from case management workers and mental-health professionals.  Mx. McGovern, who identifies as queer and transgender, said the long runway was meant to ensure that the people involved, many of whom have long faced rejection from family or community institutions, do not feel abandoned or ''left behind'' when the program ends.  New York City has one of the largest populations of L.G.B.T.Q. residents in the country, and it has long been a haven for queer people escaping hostility in their communities.  ''This is the city where everybody sees themselves making it,'' said Mx. Smith, who came to New York in 2019. ''I had that idea, too.''  When they came to the city, Mx. Smith had been in the United States less than a year. They had arrived, undocumented, from Jamaica at the end of 2018, going first to Florida and then to Massachusetts. As Mx. Smith came to realize they were transgender, they knew their mother would not be supportive.  ''She didn't get it,'' Mx. Smith said. ''She was still in the customs of home. So I had to leave, because she wasn't going to understand who I was or where I'm going.''  Mx. Smith arrived in New York with no job and nowhere to say. The Ali Forney Center, a nonprofit that supports homeless L.G.B.T.Q. youth and is partnering with the city's Unity Works program, provided Mx. Smith with housing and helped them get their green card.  The city's first lady, Chirlane McCray, started the Unity Project in 2017 to better connect city agencies to young L.G.B.T.Q. people like Mx. Smith, who arrived in the city lacking support from their families.  ''When you're just starting out, and you're faced with not having support from important adults in your life, and you're new to the city, you have to navigate figuring out how you're going to move forward,'' Ms. McCray said in an interview.  Homeless L.G.B.T.Q. youth make up about 40 percent of the city's homeless youth population, according to data. Experts and city officials have attributed the high rate in large part to rejection from family members.  ''We're dealing with young people who are being fundamentally rejected because of who they are,'' said Alexander Roque, the executive director of the Ali Forney Center.  For homeless youth, that trauma is often compounded by the instability of sleeping on the street, Mr. Roque said, where young people face safety risks including sexual violence. They also typically lack access to supportive and inclusive community services, including housing, education and mental-health resources.  As those young people reach adulthood and age out of the youth shelter system, jobs can provide them with a path toward stability and economic security.  ''Getting jobs is the most concrete response to their family rejection,'' Mr. Roque said. ''Like, 'I can still make it. I can still be successful, I am not what you think of me.'''  But people who identify as L.G.B.T.Q. are significantly more likely to be unemployed, according to data from the Williams Institute at the U.C.L.A. School of Law. They are also more likely to be paid less than heterosexual and cisgender people and to live in poverty, and they face significant workplace discrimination.  During the pandemic, the unemployment gap appears to have widened. Last June, the Human Rights Campaign found that L.G.B.T.Q. people were more likely to lose their jobs or have their hours or wages cut because of Covid-19. Mr. Roque said that 90 percent of the young people the Ali Forney Center worked with had lost their jobs.  Even as the pandemic intensified the need for Unity Works, it was also threatening the program's viability. Last summer, with the city anticipating a massive budget shortfall because of the virus, it put the program on pause.  Elected officials, advocacy groups and nonprofit organizations called on the city to keep the program alive, and the city ultimately funded it for $2.6 million over the next five fiscal years.  Mx. McGovern, a lawyer who works in public policy, said they hoped the program would encourage participants to reach for goals that might otherwise seem distant.  ''That core sense of wanting to feel seen and safe and belong and heard about your dreams and aspirations and your right to exist and be in the world -- it's something that I can deeply relate to,'' they said.  MARIO SMITH, an immigrant from Jamaica who is transgender.; ASHE McGOVERN, the executive director of the Unity Project. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ELIANEL CLINTON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004k "
382		"    One Dead, Two Hurt in Long Island Shooting  By Mihir Zaveri, Daniel E. Slotnik and Johnny Diaz  977 words 21 April 2021   21     The police said the gunman, who was arrested on Tuesday after opening fire at a Stop & Shop in West Hempstead, was an employee who collected shopping carts in the parking lot.  Tuesday morning seemed ordinary at the Stop & Shop supermarket in West Hempstead, N.Y. Hundreds of shoppers walked the aisles or rifled through produce, as store clerks checked customers out.  But just after 11 a.m., gunshots rang out from a manager's office on the store's second floor. The unremarkable midday scene devolved into chaos, as employees scrambled to hide and shoppers burst out of the store in a panic.  Police said that a store employee who collected shopping carts in the parking lot had showed up to work on Tuesday and fatally shot a store manager and wounded two others. The employee, Gabriel DeWitt Wilson, 30, of Long Beach and Hempstead, N.Y., was arrested on Tuesday afternoon at a nearby apartment building, after an hourslong search.  The Stop & Shop in West Hempstead, a Long Island hamlet of nearly 20,000 people, became the scene of yet another shattering act of gun violence in a country already reeling from a string of other mass shootings -- including one at a FedEx facility in Indianapolis last week that left eight people dead. In March, a gunman killed 10 people at a supermarket in Colorado.  ''Too often we sit here and we talk about active shootings that happen around the country,'' Commissioner Patrick J. Ryder of the Nassau County Police Department said at a news conference on Tuesday afternoon. ''Today it's in our backyard.''  The motive for the shooting remained unclear, the police said, though they were investigating whether it may have been connected to a workplace dispute.  Commissioner Ryder said Mr. Wilson went straight to a second-floor office and shot two people when he showed up to work. He then went to a second office and fatally shot the manager, before leaving the store and holing up at the apartment building about a mile and a half east.  A SWAT team captured Mr. Wilson as he tried to escape from the ground floor of the apartment building, Commissioner Ryder said.  Court records show an assault charge and a drug case in Maryland against Mr. Wilson, who was associated with multiple addresses on Long Island. Commissioner Ryder said Mr. Wilson had previously been treated for a mental illness in Nassau County.  Commissioner Ryder said the authorities were still investigating the connection between Mr. Wilson and the victims, who were not named. Two were recovering at the hospital, in addition to the manager, 49, who was killed.  Hundreds of people were inside the store when the shooting took place, Commissioner Ryder said. Local schools were placed on lockdown and neighbors were advised to stay indoors as the police searched the area nearby for the gunman, who they said left the scene carrying a small handgun.  Kelly Egan, an official with a union that represents meat and fish workers at the supermarket, said that she rushed to the store after hearing about the shooting and arrived to a hectic scene, with around 50 officers milling around and a helicopter hovering above the store.  ''Everything was on lockdown, and our members were carted off to another location because they didn't catch the shooter,'' Ms. Egan said.  She said none of the workers who were members of her union were injured but that they were ''totally traumatized.''  ''They said they heard the shots, and everything after that was just chaos,'' Ms. Egan said.  She said that the rash of recent shootings across the nation had made her members wary, even when they were doing a mundane shift at the meat counter.  ''It's sad for our members to go to work every day and read stories about supermarkets getting shot up,'' she said, adding, ''They're rattled beyond belief.''  Stop & Shop, which is based in Quincy, Mass., is a chain of 400 neighborhood grocery stores throughout Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York and New Jersey.  The company did not answer questions about Mr. Wilson's employment at the West Hempstead store, or his connection to the victims. In an emailed statement, Gordon Reid, the president of Stop & Shop, said the store would be closed for the time being.  ''Our hearts go out to the families of the victims, our associates, customers and the first responders who have responded heroically to this tragic situation,'' he said. ''At this time, we are cooperating fully with local law enforcement on the investigation.''  Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said that his office was ''closely monitoring'' the situation.  Dan Rehman, the superintendent of schools for the West Hempstead Union Free School District, said that students and the district's faculty were safe, but that people were barred from entering or exiting school buildings as a precaution.  Marie Hodge said she drove to the scene from her home in West Hempstead to speak with the police to relay a tip from a friend, who had told her where the gunman might be hiding. Mr. Wilson was later arrested near that location.  Ms. Hodge said she had lived in the area for about 10 years, was a regular customer at the store and knew the manager who was killed.  ''It feels terrible because I could have been in the store, I go there all the time,'' Ms. Hodge said.  She added, ''I'm scared. I'm not going back in there. I'm never going back in there.''  Schools in West Hempstead were placed on lockdown and neighbors advised to stay indoors as the police searched the area for the gunman. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Johnny Milano for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004i "
383		"   MARC STEIN ON BASKETBALL  Q. What's the Key to the Knicks' Reversal? Hint: Think Jokic and Bird.  By Marc Stein  2,907 words 21 April 2021   10     Behind Julius Randle, the Knicks have become one of the N.B.A.'s most surprising -- and best defensive -- teams. Kristaps Porzingis, who?  If the Knicks had known how well Julius Randle would play for Coach Tom Thibodeau, presumably they would not have selected Obi Toppin, who essentially plays the same position, with the eighth overall pick in November's N.B.A. draft.  If Knicks fans had known what Randle would become in his second season in New York, maybe they would not have despaired when Kristaps Porzingis was traded to Dallas in January 2019.  If anyone had known Randle could transform himself from a career 29.5 percent shooter from 3-point range into a 40.5 percent shooter this season, and dared to say so, chances are such bold souls would not have been believed. Randle's improvement from deep, after all, is the most significant midcareer increase in long-distance shooting proficiency in league history.  You can look it up: Randle is on pace to become the first N.B.A. player to enter a season with a 3-point success rate below 30 percent (on more than 500 attempts) and then shoot 40 percent or better on 3s (with a minimum of 150 attempts), according to research from the noted statistical expert Justin Kubatko.  ''The big thing is, when he added the 3-point shot,'' Thibodeau said last week, ''that just opened up everything else.''  Thibodeau was referring to Randle's game, but he might as well have been talking about the entire franchise. Ignited by Randle's improvement, the Knicks are having the kind of enjoyable season that so many teams, even with better records, have not had because of pandemic challenges and injury woes.  It's a season that, based on pretty much any reputable projection in December, was supposed to end with, at best, 25 wins for the Knicks. Into Tuesday's home date with Charlotte they instead toted a 31-27 record, and a six-game winning streak that ranked as the N.B.A.'s longest active one. The Nets are New York's championship contenders, but the Knicks -- the city's true basketball love -- appear headed, at worst, for a spot in the playoff play-in round after missing the postseason for seven consecutive years.  The Knicks, largely at Thibodeau's urging, chased Gordon Hayward in free agency, when the gruff new coach wasn't sure that his team had a foundational player. Hayward chose to sign with the Hornets, who were willing to go to a financial level ($120 million over four years) that Thibodeau's bosses deemed too rich, given Hayward's age and injury history. Randle soon illustrated that the roster wasn't nearly as barren as feared.  ''The biggest thing is Ju is setting the tempo every night with putting pressure on the rim, putting pressure on the defense, and we're trying to play around him,'' said Derrick Rose, the former All-Star acquired by the Knicks from Detroit in February to bolster the bench.  Randle became the Knicks' only current All-Star when he was named to the team for the first time, in March. As of Monday, 58 games into the 72-game schedule, he had played in 57 and was averaging 23.7 points, 10.5 rebounds and 6.1 assists, while shooting that 40.5 percent from 3-point range. Those offensive numbers have been matched or exceeded by only one player this season -- Denver's Nikola Jokic, a favorite for the Most Valuable Player Award -- and only one player reached them before this season: Larry Bird in 1984-85, one of three M.V.P. seasons for the Boston Celtics star.  After four consecutive 30-point games, something no other Knick had managed since Carmelo Anthony in 2014, Randle on Monday was named the N.B.A.'s player of the week in the Eastern Conference. Yet it was Friday's masterpiece in Dallas, Randle's hometown, that gave the Knicks their most significant jolt of positivity since, well, who can even remember?  Lined up against Porzingis, and a Mavericks team many thought had fleeced the Knicks in the Porzingis deal, Randle rumbled for 44 points, 10 rebounds and 7 assists in the Knicks' 117-109 victory. Perhaps it's no accident that Randle had such a big game in his lone appearance of the season back home. The franchises and their fan bases have seemingly been locked in a staredown since the trade, constantly seeking validation that their team chose the right course. Dallas is also where Randle did most of his shooting and fitness work in the off-season.  While performances like that can't undo how little the Knicks got out of the Porzingis trade -- Dennis Smith Jr. was ultimately traded to Detroit to get Rose, and DeAndre Jordan left in free agency for the Nets -- Randle's shooting and playmaking have allowed fans to stop focusing on the downsides of the deal and look toward the future. That means focusing on the two first-round picks the Knicks got from Dallas.  One season of strong 3-point shooting doesn't put Randle in the same sentence as Golden State's Stephen Curry, but one thing Randle and Curry share is that they made the most of their extended off-seasons. Curry told me in February that he'd had the most productive off-season of his career. The same holds for Randle, who recently described himself as ''obsessive over'' broadening his shooting range before this season.  ''He's prepared himself for this,'' Thibodeau said. ''You can't forget that.''  This pairing of player and coach also turned out to be a better-than-anticipated match. Randle was regarded for years as a major defensive liability but has responded the hard-driving Thibodeau's prodding with more engaged defense. For all the skepticism about Thibodeau's ability to nurture a younger team, the Knicks awoke Tuesday with the league's third-best defense.  Thibodeau, as a result, is up there with Phoenix's Monty Williams and Utah's Quin Snyder as a contender to be named coach of the year, while Randle is a favorite for the Most Improved Player award -- and a potential All-N.B.A. selection.  I must reiterate that I still find it jarring to see Randle wearing No. 30, which the Knicks should have retired long ago in tribute to Bernard King, who was my favorite player throughout high school. He won a scoring title in 1984-85 and was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 2013. Those achievements trump any suggestion that he wasn't in New York long enough for his number to hang in the Madison Square Garden rafters.  I called King on Tuesday to get his view. ''It's always strange for me, just a little bit, when I see No. 30 running up and down the court,'' he said, but added that he is a Randle admirer who watches every Knicks game he can from his home in Atlanta.  ''I'm a Knick,'' King said.  For those of us who have lost hope that the Knicks will ever remove those digits from circulation in King's honor, there is a hint of consolation in the knowledge that Randle, the fourth player to wear No. 30 since King left the Knicks for Washington in 1987, is the first to perform at a level reminiscent of King.  What it says on the front of the jersey apparently means just as much to Randle, too.  ''I'm damn proud to be a Knick,'' Randle wrote in March in an essay for The Players' Tribune.  The Scoop @TheSteinLine  Corner Three  You ask; I answer. Every week in this space, I'll field three questions posed via email at marcstein-newsletter@nytimes.com . Please include your first and last name, as well as the city you're writing in from, and make sure ''Corner Three'' is in the subject line.  (Questions may be condensed or slightly edited for clarity.)  Q: Knowing your fondness for both basketball and soccer, what was your perspective on the proposed European Super League? The idea that there would be reserved slots in a breakaway soccer league for 12 to 15 founding clubs and a few rotating slots set aside for qualifying teams looks very much like the current EuroLeague basketball setup. Why is this format deemed OK in basketball but not soccer? -- Stew Levine (Plano, Texas)  Stein: If European basketball had all the best players in the world, as do the elite teams in European soccer that wanted to break away from UEFA and form their own version of the Champions League, there would be a similarly raucous outcry about the EuroLeague template. EuroLeague basketball doesn't have anywhere near the same mass following as soccer's Champions League because the best basketball players in the world are overwhelmingly in the N.B.A.  Yet it's great that you brought up the EuroLeague, because the link here wasn't being mentioned enough. Many in Europe described the Super League proposal as a desire among the owners of the 12 breakaway clubs in England, Spain and Italy to adopt an American major league sports model, at least in part because of the influence of American owners in the group who also own N.F.L., N.B.A. and Major League Baseball franchises. Another handy way of looking at it was that they wanted to adopt a EuroLeague basketball approach, in which Europe's traditional powers were essentially assured of staying in the league no matter how they fared in their domestic leagues, with elements of the American franchise system mixed in.  Owners of the richest soccer clubs abroad surely envy many things when they compare the Champions League to the N.B.A. or the N.F.L. They want a league that their teams don't have to qualify for every season, that carries no threat of relegation, and that has the most high-profile clubs playing each other more often -- all to collect more television and commercial revenue without having to share as much as they do now. Even though their ambitions swiftly unraveled this week, I think we can safely presume that they would prefer the EuroLeague structure, which still falls under FIBA's jurisdiction, over fully embracing the N.B.A.'s template.  To truly adopt the American model for major league team sports would mean signing up for a salary cap (with luxury-tax penalties) and, if not some sort of draft procedure, likely a league office headed by an independent commissioner to keep order. The teams at the heart of the Super League proposal don't have to deal with any of that now and are presumably prepared to go only so far in reinventing themselves.  Also: There is an interesting N.B.A. footnote to all of this. Leading up to the Champions League final, I wrote this piece in May 2019 about the N.B.A.'s growing interest in working a soccer-style cup competition into the middle of its regular-season schedule. The N.B.A.'s thinking: Adding an extra trophy for teams to chase might give the 82-game regular-season grind more meaning and excitement.  Financial distress for even soccer's richest clubs because of the pandemic was certainly a factor in the Super League proposal, but I can't say I expected the Champions League's existence to be challenged so overtly before the N.B.A. could launch its experiment.  Q: He's still playing? What is he, like, 50? -- @BoltBill from Twitter  Stein: I've been getting this question a lot since I reported on Monday that the Nets were in advanced talks to sign Mike James, the former Phoenix and New Orleans guard.  This is the Mike James, 30, who played briefly in the N.B.A. during the 2017-18 season, spent much of the past two seasons at CSKA Moscow in Russia and has mostly played overseas since turning professional in 2014-15.  The Mike James you referred to in your question is 45, last appeared in the N.B.A. in the 2013-14 season and played on 11 different teams, including two stints each with Houston and Chicago.  Q: My N.B.A. fandom started in Southern California when my parents amazingly got a television for my brother's and my bedroom in 1968. Wilt Chamberlain had joined the Lakers, Jerry West was the resident star and I was hooked. Then in 1976, I lived for three months in Park Slope in Brooklyn in a rent-controlled apartment. One of the residents on our floor had the Nets' games on local television and a bunch of us would crowd into the apartment to watch games.  I vividly remember that, at least once a game, Julius Erving would do something unexpected and breathtaking. Nobody I've ever watched since has recreated that kind of excitement and electricity. As good as Dr. J was in the N.B.A. with Philadelphia, it doesn't compare to how good he was as a Net in the A.B.A. The next tier for me would be Connie Hawkins, Vince Carter and Zion Williamson, but Erving was at a different level. -- Richard Neuman  Stein: Sometimes a nostalgic story is as good as an insightful question. I think we've established by now how much I love to reminisce about the 1970s and 1980s N.B.A., so thanks for sending this in.  Talk about the 1970s Nets has picked up in recent weeks given the team's emerging status as championship contenders and the fast-approaching 45th anniversary of the Nets' last A.B.A. game on May 13, 1976.  Allow me to refer you to this wonderful recent piece from my colleague Harvey Araton, the retired new_york_times columnist, on how some of the principles from the Nets' glory days (Kevin Loughery, Rod Thorn and Dr. J himself) still wonder about what might have been if the Nets hadn't sold the rights to Erving to fund their move into the N.B.A. in 1976.  Numbers Game  30  The four players to wear No. 30 for the Knicks since Bernard King left the franchise in 1987 are Frank Williams (2003-4), Earl Barron (2010), John Jenkins (2019) and Julius Randle, starting in the 2019-20 season.  19,951  LaMarcus Aldridge, who abruptly announced his retirement last week because of a heart condition, was drafted in 2006. Since that draft, Aldridge and LeBron James are the only two players to record at least 19,000 points and 8,000 rebounds. With 19,951 career points, Aldridge was 49 shy of 20,000 when he walked away.  12  One of the most notable achievements in Aldridge's N.B.A. career was not statistical: He was the most coveted player in the N.B.A.'s 2015 free-agent class and lured San Antonio back to the marketplace after Coach Gregg Popovich -- foiled in his attempt to persuade Jason Kidd to leave the Nets in July 2003 -- had essentially sworn off competing for top free agents for more than a decade.  42  When he scored 42 points in a recent loss to Utah, Luguentz Dort became the first Oklahoma City player to reach the 40-point plateau before his 22nd birthday since Kevin Durant, who did it 12 times in his first three seasons with the Thunder franchise, including once as a rookie in Seattle. Dort, a noted defensive specialist, also hounded Utah's Donovan Mitchell into a 7-for-16 shooting performance in the same game. Mitchell had averaged 40.5 points in his previous four games.  39.1  Golden State's Stephen Curry entered Monday's game at Philadelphia having averaged 39.1 points on 54.6 percent shooting over his previous 10 games. The last player to assemble a 10-game stretch that matched Curry in both categories was Chicago's Michael Jordan, who averaged 39.4 points on 59.4 percent shooting over a 10-game stretch late in the 1989-90 season, according to Basketball Reference.  Curry then scored 49 points in a victory over the 76ers on Monday and his April tear (nearly 41 points per game) has hiked his scoring average for the season up to a league-leading 31.4 points per game. Curry, who turned 33 in March, is on track to join Jordan on the short list of players to average at least 30 points per game for an entire season at age 32 or older.  Hit me up anytime on Twitter ( @TheSteinLine ) or Facebook ( @MarcSteinNBA ) or Instagram ( @thesteinline ). Send any other feedback to marcstein-newsletter@nytimes.com .  Go behind the N.B.A.'s curtain with the league's foremost expert. Get Marc Stein's weekly newsletter in your inbox. Sign up at nytimes.com/newsletters.  Julius Randle, near left, has made an unparalleled improvement in his 3-point accuracy, to 40.5 percent from a career 29.5 percent. And that ''just opened up everything else,'' Coach Tom Thibodeau said. (POOL  BY ADAM HUNGER)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0005g "
384		"    Menu for Lunch In Italy Includes Illegal Course: Fried Songbirds  By Emma Bubola  803 words 21 April 2021   6     The Italian police were called to investigate a luncheon for a potential violation of coronavirus rules. They found a feast of migrating finches.  ROME -- It seemed like just another violation of coronavirus social-distance restrictions when the Italian police broke up a luncheon of about 20 people last week near the northern city of Brescia.  But then they stumbled onto an illegal massacre on the menu.  The authorities caught the group in a local government building preparing a cookout of about 65 protected migratory birds, mostly finches, including two hawfinches, a shy species, and one brambling, known by its orange breast and white rump.  The forest division of the carabinieri, Italy's national military police force, were tipped off about the illegal lunchtime gathering by a phone call and found the guests surrounding a buffet of appetizers and drinks but no main courses. The guests assured the police that everything was within regulations, with masks on and distance respected. But upon further inspection, carabinieri officers found a large pan filled with dozens of fried songbirds hidden beneath the table.  They recognized the protected species, officers said, by the shape of their bills. Some are globally threatened.  ''Shameful,'' Italy's anti-hunting league said.  ''Enraging,'' the animal protection league said.  ''A delicacy,'' said Floriano Massardi, a regional official who, like many in the area, likes to eat songbirds on a skewer.  The area where the forbidden feast took place, Gardone Val Trompia, is smack in the middle of an important migration route for thrushes, greenfinches and blackbirds.  For centuries, hunters in the area have laid traps for them in the bushes and on tree branches or shot them out of the sky. Whether captured on the ground or in the air, they often met their end next to polenta or impaled on ''the Brescian spit.''  But the local tradition has become largely illegal as legislators have moved to protect a growing number of species and bird families. Nevertheless, the valleys north of Brescia have remained Italy's most dangerous kill zone for many songbirds, with hundreds of thousands hunted illegally every year.  Italy itself is an avian danger zone. Five million protected birds are shot dead there every year. That's about a fifth of the total birds illegally killed every year along the Mediterranean coast, Northern Europe and the Caucasus, according to BirdLife International.  Animal protection associations said they hoped the raid would put new focus on the illegal activity in the country that is the most egregious songbird killer in Europe.  The punishment for those who attended the lunch will depend on what charges are brought, but the fine could be more than 2,000 euros for the guest who brought the birds.  Last week, a Brescia court held the first hearing of a local man who kept 788 dead songbirds in his freezer. They included robins, which are sold illegally for 3 to 5 euros to restaurants. They are particularly appreciated for their thin bill, which is, for some, considered edible.  In Italy, hunting any animal is permitted only with a license, and there are penalties for hunting protected species and selling them. For years, the issue has been at the center of a political clash between animal rights advocates often backed by progressive politicians -- which have demanded stricter limitations -- and hunters' associations and conservative politicians, who aim to facilitate hunting.  Animal rights activists point out that songbirds are in danger throughout Europe, with 40 once-abundant migratory species disappearing.  ''There is a general crisis of biodiversity,'' said Annamaria Procacci, a board member of ENPA, Italy's animal protection league, and a former Green Party senator.  ''And then there are people feasting on it.''  Mr. Massardi, the official who called the protected bramblings a delicacy, is a hunter who has proposed removing protections for some songbirds, including those on Friday's menu. He said he wanted to save tradition.  He was acting ''in the name of the Brescian spit,'' he said, a typical dish made of skewered slices of pork, chicken, rabbit and songbirds. The chaffinch and the brambling, he said, give the spit a distinctive tart taste that he has not savored for 10 years.  Mr. Massardi did not condone Friday's luncheon, saying it was an offense to all the restaurant owners suffering the closures imposed by the government. But he did not see why the government should forbid what was on the table.  ''I don't understand why chicken, yes, and these birds, no,'' he said. ''Chickens are birds, too.''  Bramblings in flight. An official who wants to remove protections for some songbirds called the species ''a delicacy.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY Boris Roessler/Picture Alliance, via Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004e "
385		"    Biden Praises Verdict As Moment of Justice  By Katie Rogers  876 words 21 April 2021   19     President Biden has been outspoken about George Floyd's death, and on Tuesday he called it ''murder in full light of day.''  WASHINGTON -- President Biden called a guilty verdict in the murder trial of the former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin on Tuesday a potential ''giant step forward in the march toward justice in America,'' but he also called the jury's decision a ''much too rare'' step for Black Americans who have been killed or abused during interactions with the police.  ''It was a murder in the full light of day, and it ripped the blinders off for the whole world to see,'' the president said of the killing of George Floyd, who died after Mr. Chauvin knelt on his neck for more than nine minutes, and whose death ignited nationwide protests. ''For so many, it feels like it took all of that for the judicial system to deliver a just -- just basic accountability.''  Mr. Biden assumed the presidency during a national reckoning over race and has staked his political legacy around a promise of racial equality, which includes an overhaul of policing. He has been outspoken about Mr. Floyd's death, saying it was a ''wake-up call'' for the United States.  The president delivered his remarks to the nation hours after taking the unusual step of weighing in on the Chauvin trial's outcome before the jury came back with a decision, and after telling reporters that he was ''praying'' for the ''right verdict.''  Amid a series of recent police shootings and other violent episodes over the course of the trial, Mr. Biden has repeatedly called on Congress to pass an ambitious policing overhaul bill, named for Mr. Floyd. On Tuesday evening, both he and Vice President Kamala Harris, who as a senator helped to write the bill, reiterated that plea to lawmakers.  ''Here's the truth about racial injustice,'' said Ms. Harris, who took the lectern before Mr. Biden. ''It is not just a Black America problem or a people of color problem. It is a problem for every American. It is keeping us from fulfilling the promise of liberty and justice for all. And it is holding our nation back from realizing our full potential.''  Just before the verdict was announced, the White House canceled a speech that Mr. Biden was to deliver on his infrastructure plan so that he could watch the proceedings alongside Ms. Harris and a group of aides in his private dining room near the Oval Office.  The jury's deliberations had been closely tracked throughout the day: In the minutes before the verdict's delivery, White House aides were seen sprinting through the West Wing, phones in hand, and setting up a lectern in the Cross Hall, where the president and vice president would later speak.  Just after the verdict was announced, the president spoke on the phone with members of Mr. Floyd's family.  ''We're all so relieved,'' the president said to a group of people that included Ben Crump, the Floyd family's lawyer. ''I'm anxious to see you guys, I really am.''  Mr. Biden can trace his political success, in part, to how he responded to the nationwide protests that rose up after Mr. Floyd's death.  Last June, as President Donald J. Trump stoked tensions on Twitter, calling the protests a result of the ''radical left'' and threatening to send in the National Guard, Mr. Biden traveled to Houston with his wife, Jill Biden, to meet with Mr. Floyd's relatives.  The hour he spent with the Floyd family effectively created a split-screen with Mr. Trump that bolstered his war chest and added momentum to his campaign.  ''I won't fan the flames of hate,'' Mr. Biden said at the time. ''I will seek to heal the racial wounds that have long plagued this country -- not use them for political gain.''  Last week, Mr. Biden abandoned a campaign promise to establish a police oversight commission during his first 100 days in office, and administration officials have provided few details about how far the president will go to combat racism in policing.  Instead, the Biden administration has embraced the Floyd bill, which would combat racial discrimination in policing but, given the slim majority held by Senate Democrats and the amount of Republican opposition, it is unlikely to become law.  Passed by House Democrats in March, the bill would address policies that are at the center of the debate over race and policing. It would ban chokeholds and eliminate existing protections under qualified immunity, which shields officials who have been accused of violating others' constitutional rights. It would also create a national registry to track police officers who have engaged in misconduct.  On Tuesday evening, Mr. Biden used the podium, and any momentum caused by the ruling, to again present a case to the public for the bill.  ''George Floyd was murdered a year ago,'' the president said. ''There is meaningful police reform legislation under his name. You just heard the vice president speak of it -- she helped write it.''  PRESIDENT BIDEN, speaking after a jury found Derek Chauvin guilty. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003v "
386		"    The Huntington Gets Hip  By Robin Pogrebin  1,239 words 21 April 2021   1     ''Made in L.A.'' represents an effort by the Huntington to expand its contemporary art programming and present more artists of color.  SAN MARINO, Calif. -- The juxtaposition is striking. In one gallery, Thomas Gainsborough's classic 18th-century oil painting, ''The Blue Boy,'' gazes out from the ornate walls, having just undergone an extensive restoration. In another gallery, an installation by the Los Angeles artist Monica Majoli explores Blueboy magazine, one of the earliest gay publications in the U.S., through sultry images of scantily dressed young men.  When did the Huntington get hip?  This is not the institution you thought you knew for its Beaux-Arts mansion, imposing research library and elegant botanical gardens, including one inspired by Suzhou, China. It's now also a hub for cutting-edge contemporary art.  For the first time, the Huntington Library, Art Museum and Botanical Gardens has joined the Hammer Museum in presenting the biennial, ''Made in L.A. 2020: a version,'' which spotlights videos, films, sculptures, performances and paintings by 30 Los Angeles-based artists.  The show, which opened when its host museums were finally able to welcome back the public on April 17, is clearly a departure for the Huntington.  While the museum has presented living artists such as Alex Israel in 2015 and Celia Paul in 2019, ''Made in L.A.'' is its most ambitious exhibition of contemporary art to date. And the show represents an effort to reach new audiences, diversify its programming and feature more artists of color.  ''It's a shot across the bow,'' said Christina Nielsen, who became the director of the Huntington Art Museum in 2018. She considers the exhibition ''an opportunity to engage with the broader contemporary art community here in L.A. It's really opening the doors.''  Located just outside Los Angeles on a sprawling former ranch purchased in 1903 by the railroad and real-estate magnate Henry E. Huntington, the museum opened to the public in 1928 and still presents a formal, European environment. So even some of the participating artists in ''Made in L.A.'' were initially skeptical about showing their works there.  ''I thought it was a strange choice -- I was a little concerned,'' Majoli said, adding that her experience proved to be positive. ''It was almost like a rich soil to work with; the work was well set off.''  Majoli said she was impressed by the museum's openness to her installation, given how directly she deals with themes of gay liberation and self-determination. She felt free to explore what she considers ''the queer subtext of 'Blue Boy,''' a painting originally inspired by the Flemish Baroque artist Anthony Van Dyck.  Other artists also created works that respond to the Huntington's historic collection. Ann Greene Kelly's fabric-draped chairs reflect the draped garments that adorn the Huntington's 1859 marble sculpture of the 3rd-century queen of Palmyra, ''Zenobia in Chains.''  ''It became this great opportunity to stress context,'' said Lauren Mackler, an independent curator who, with Myriam Ben Salah, organized ''Made in L.A.''  The artist Jill Mulleady specifically requested that her four paintings be located near Zenobia in the Huntington's American Art Galleries. They include a diptych, ''Interior of a Forest,'' that references a work with the same title by Paul Cézanne and also frames the Xenobia statue.  ''It was interesting to work there,'' Mulleady said, ''not to change history, but to add layers.''  Some artists discovered the Huntington as a source of inspiration long ago. Robert Rauschenberg credited his encounter with ''The Blue Boy'' -- as a 19-year-old Naval medical technician on leave -- with his decision to become an artist. (His 1979 work, ''Global Loft (Spread'') on wood panels, was acquired by the museum in 2012.)  The artist Kehinde Wiley has talked about how his paintings of Black men in classical regal poses were informed by his early experience of the Huntington's British portraits. ''That was really impactful for me because of all the pomp and circumstance,'' Wiley told WNYC in 2009, ''particularly for me as a young Black kid.''  To some extent, the Huntington's ''Made in L.A.'' show echoes a larger trend in the art world away from separate lanes for different types of art (as the Museum of Modern Art has done with the elimination of its discipline galleries) and toward situating historical art in contemporary spaces (as the Metropolitan Museum of Art and now the Frick Collection have done in the Breuer Building).  The Huntington has been increasing its contemporary art initiatives. In 2016, it started five yearlong collaborations with cultural organizations such as the Vincent Price Art Museum at East Los Angeles College in Monterey Park, Calif.  The Huntington, partnering with the Yale Center for British Art, is presenting a trilogy of shows on female artists curated by Hilton Als, the New Yorker magazine critic. Starting with Celia Paul, the series will also feature Lynette Yiadom-Boakye and conclude with Njideka Akunyili Crosby in late 2022.  And while price may remain a barrier for Los Angeles's museum-goers (admission is $25 for adults, $29 on weekends), Nielsen said the museum has occasional free days and made the point that ''it is cheaper for a family of four to go to the Huntington than to go to Disneyland.''  Greater efforts are still needed to help the museum achieve more diversity in its audience, programming and hiring. (The Los Angeles Times art columnist Carolina Miranda recently questioned whether the Huntington, as ''the benefactor of Gilded Age wealth'' could ''evolve into the post-George Floyd era.'')  Nielsen said that she plans to fill three curatorial positions with people of color and that the museum has been acquiring more works by female artists and people of color. The entire Huntington institution, including its museum, library and gardens, has an annual operating budget of more than $50 million, with a hefty endowment of more than $550 million.  The Huntington recently completed a new gallery dedicated to Chinese art, located in its expanded Chinese Garden (there is also a Japanese garden). ''We're located in the San Gabriel Valley, one of the largest Asian populations and Asian-American populations in this country,'' Nielsen said.  Meanwhile, longtime museum loyalists will have to get used to wandering from staple period rooms of Savonnerie carpets and Sévres porcelain into potentially unsettling installations like Sabrina Tarasoff's haunted house in ''Made in L.A.''  ''I would never say we should turn our back on the historic collection,'' Nielsen added. ''But I am also deeply committed to showing how that historic collection resonates with contemporary issues.  ''We need to rethink the past -- that's what the scholars here are continually doing,'' she continued. ''We're a place where history is preserved and history is written. And it's a place where history is preserved and rewritten.''  Monica Majoli's installation for the new exhibition ''Made in L.A. 2020: a version.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY HUNTINGTON LIBRARY, ART MUSEUM AND BOTANICAL GARDENS) (C1); Top, two Umar Rashid's paintings and a leaded glass window from the Huntington's permanent collection; in the foreground, chairs by Ann Greene Kelly. Above left, at right, Christina Forrer's ''Intervision'' (2020). Above right, Jill Mulleady's four paintings frame the sculpture ''Xenobia in Chains.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA HUNTINGTON LIBRARY, ART MUSEUM AND BOTANICAL GARDENS; JOSHUA WHITE) (C6)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004b "
387		"    Tense Wait, and an Emotional Response  By Michael M. Grynbaum, Katie Robertson and John Koblin  700 words 21 April 2021   19     Every major broadcast and cable news network -- and even ESPN -- broke into regular programming on Tuesday for live coverage of the Derek Chauvin verdict.  Every major broadcast and cable news network -- and even ESPN -- broke into regular programming on Tuesday for live coverage of the verdict, ensuring that millions of Americans watched in unison as a Minnesota jury found the former police officer Derek Chauvin guilty on all charges in the death of George Floyd.  ''Justice has been served,'' the CNN anchor Don Lemon declared on-air shortly after the verdict, speaking alongside footage of people celebrating -- and some crying in relief -- outside the Minneapolis courthouse.  Mr. Lemon continued: ''I'm sure people who are watching all over this country, watching all over the world, are on their devices getting messages from people, as I am, saying: 'Thank you, Jesus, thank God. Finally, finally -- justice on all counts.'''  That sense of relief was echoed by analysts on several networks, including NBC News, where the political analyst Eugene Robinson told viewers that he had ''exhaled for the first time in more than an hour'' after learning of the verdict.  ''One of my first thoughts was, you know, it shouldn't have been this hard, right?'' Mr. Robinson said. ''We haven't reached our destination on the racial reckoning that we need to have in this country. But I think this will be seen as a step forward, as opposed to what it potentially could have been seen as, which would have been a giant step back.''  On Fox News, the anchor Jeanine Pirro, a former New York State judge, said immediately after the jury found Mr. Chauvin guilty: ''Make no mistake, the facts are solid on this verdict. This verdict will be upheld on appeal.'' She took pains to frame the outcome of the trial as a sign ''that the American justice system works.''  Fox News covered the news on its usual 5 p.m. talk show, ''The Five,'' where the co-host Juan Williams called the day ''very emotional.''  ''It would have been so upsetting, it would have been a kick in the stomach,'' he told viewers, ''if in this most extreme situation, where everybody can see what happened, if the jury had somehow said, 'Let's split the verdict.'''  His co-host Greg Gutfeld offered a more disjointed take, claiming it was a ''myth'' that the trial had divided the nation and saying he was satisfied with the verdict because it might prevent what he characterized as violent protests.  ''I'm glad that he was found guilty on all charges, even if he might not be guilty of all charges,'' Mr. Gutfeld said.  He was quickly interrupted by Ms. Pirro, who had been muttering in disapproving tones as Mr. Gutfeld was speaking. Ms. Pirro scolded Mr. Gutfeld for his views, saying the verdict was a result of clear facts presented by prosecutors. ''That courtroom is a place where the evidence is brought in and it is pristine in the way it's handled,'' she said.  At 8 p.m., Tucker Carlson opened his highly rated Fox News show by questioning how the jury had reached its verdict and blasting the Black Lives Matter movement.  ''So we must stop this current insanity,'' he said. ''It's an attack on civilization. At stake is far more than the future of Derek Chauvin or the memory of George Floyd. At stake is America.'' He continued: ''So before we consider the details of today's verdict, a bigger question. One we should all think about: Can we trust the way this decision was made?''  His first guest, the New York Post columnist Miranda Devine, who described President Trump as ''an invincible hero'' in an October column, claimed there was an ''enormous amount of pressure'' on the jury. As she spoke, a caption appeared onscreen: ''BLATANT INTIMIDATION DURING DEREK CHAUVIN TRIAL.''  A screen in Times Square showing the reaction in Minnesota after the jury found Derek Chauvin guilty of murdering George Floyd.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gabriela Bhaskar for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00046 "
388		"    'A Huge Nationwide Sigh of Relief'  725 words 21 April 2021   26     Readers hail the verdict in Derek Chauvin's trial, but one writes, ''Justice will be when people of color can live in a country where they do not have to fear the bias of racist law enforcement.''  To the Editor:  Re ''Derek Chauvin Guilty of Murder in George Floyd Death'' (nytimes.com, April 20):  On Tuesday afternoon the momentous decision in the Derek Chauvin trial was announced and the verdict was guilty on all three counts. With a country kept on tenterhooks for weeks, the announcement of a guilty verdict felt just as dramatic and cathartic as one might imagine, resulting in a huge nationwide sigh of relief.  The critical question is: Will this verdict usher in a new age where we can truly say that Black Lives Matter and where striving for equality before the law is not merely lip service, but a new enduring reality?  We as a nation can take solace in the likelihood that this verdict will defuse any spontaneous protests that might have otherwise devolved in rage, a rage causing violence and destruction. But let us not forget that a man, George Floyd, is dead and that this verdict does not bring him back to his family and loved ones. It does mean that Mr. Floyd's death was not in vain, as it hopefully marks a historic turn where a police officer's abhorrent behavior was judged not only excessive, but also criminal.  It seems likely that most Americans will view this judgment as right, just and moral. It is now incumbent upon all of us to turn this moment into a lasting movement that treats Black Americans as truly equal under the law.  Ken Derow  Swarthmore, Pa.  To the Editor:  Though the jury absolutely came to the correct verdict in finding Derek Chauvin guilty on all counts, let's not mistake this outcome for justice.  Justice will be when people of color can live in a country where they do not have to fear the bias of racist law enforcement.  Justice will be when bigoted policies and voting laws are revoked in favor of equitable solutions that don't disproportionally affect certain communities.  Justice will be when, after 400 years of marginalization, scapegoating and unthinkable pain, Black people can live in the United States without being made to feel as if they don't belong.  The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. reminded us that ''the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.'' With Tuesday's verdict, we bend a little further toward an equitable and righteous society, but we are not yet close to our destination.  Gabe Downey  Southfield, Mich.  To the Editor:  Now that the jury has spoken, it is instructive to look back on the genesis of George Floyd's encounter with the police and his subsequent death, particularly from a racial and economic disparity perspective. Mr. Floyd was arrested after attempting to pay a store clerk with an allegedly counterfeit $20 bill, even though there was no evidence that he knew the bill was fake.  As the video of Mr. Floyd's arrest shows, he was confronted by multiple police officers, including one with his gun drawn. He was then subsequently treated in a rough and degrading manner by the officers when he complained that he was having difficulty complying with their request to get in the back of a squad car because of claustrophobia. We all know what happened next.  Contrast this with the way in which Bernie Madoff, who admitted to masterminding a Ponzi scheme totaling billions of dollars, was treated. Unlike Mr. Floyd, whose inhumane manhandling by the police led to his death, Mr. Madoff was visited by respectful F.B.I. agents, in a civilized white-collar criminal context, following the disclosure of his monumental financial improprieties. Further, he was able to spend the initial days of his infamy in the comfort of his multimillion-dollar New York penthouse.  Obviously, we have a way to go before we can declare that there is equal justice under the law in the United States of America.  Mark Godes  Chelsea, Mass.  A community member visited the George Floyd memorial site in Minneapolis last June. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Joshua Rashaad McFadden for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003f "
389		"    Three Guilty Verdicts, but One Crime  By Emily Bazelon  392 words 21 April 2021   18     Neither murder charge required the jury to find that Mr. Chauvin intended to kill George Floyd. Nor did the manslaughter charge.  The jury found Derek Chauvin guilty of all three counts he was facing -- second-degree murder, third-degree murder and manslaughter -- for the same crime: pinning George Floyd's neck to the asphalt with his knee until he stopped breathing.  When juries can choose among different counts and instead pick ''all of the above,'' it raises questions of how one act can meet the definition of three separate crimes. In this case, Mr. Chauvin was found guilty of:  1) causing the death of a human being, without intent, while committing or attempting to commit an assault (second-degree murder);  2) unintentionally causing a death by committing an act that is eminently dangerous to other persons while exhibiting a depraved mind, with reckless disregard for human life (third-degree murder);  3) and creating an unreasonable risk, by consciously taking the chance of causing death or great bodily harm to someone else (manslaughter).  Neither murder charge required the jury to find that Mr. Chavin intended to kill Mr. Floyd. Nor did the manslaughter charge. So the jury could have determined a state of mind for Mr. Chauvin (the legal term of art is ''mens rea'') that would cover all three charges.  The separate acts the jury had to find Mr. Chauvin committed also seem compatible with one another. To streamline the language a bit, ''committing an assault'' and ''committing an act that is eminently dangerous to other persons'' and ''creating an unreasonable risk'' can all go together.  In fact, ''eminently dangerous'' is a synonym for unreasonably risky. And both coexist easily with committing an assault.  An appeals court could disagree with this analysis and throw out one or more of the counts.  Whether that affects Mr. Chauvin's sentence depends on how Judge Peter A. Cahill parses it. Because Mr. Chauvin has no criminal history, he would receive a 12.5-year sentence for the top charge if the judge followed Minnesota's sentencing guidelines. The maximum charge for second-degree murder, however, is 40 years.  Crowds gathered outside the Hennepin County Government Center in Minneapolis on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amr Alfiky/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00043 "
390		"    Here's How the Sentencing Could Unfold  By Tim Arango  381 words 21 April 2021   18     How much prison time Mr. Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer found guilty of killing George Floyd, will have to serve will not be decided for another several weeks.  The jury in the trial of Derek Chauvin found him guilty on all three charges he faced: second-degree unintentional murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.  How much prison time Mr. Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer accused of killing George Floyd, will have to serve will not be decided until several weeks from now, after a pre-sentencing report about Mr. Chauvin's background is produced. Judge Peter A. Cahill will also have to determine whether there were special circumstances of the crime that would justify a lengthier sentence than the prison terms laid out by Minnesota's sentencing guidelines.  Because Mr. Chauvin has no criminal history, the sentencing guidelines for each of the murder charges is 12.5 years. But the maximum sentences for each charge differ: Second-degree murder could mean as long as 40 years in prison, while the maximum for third-degree murder is 25 years.  Mr. Chauvin is also charged with second-degree manslaughter, which carries a maximum sentence of 10 years, but under the guidelines he would most likely be sentenced to four years.  Before Mr. Chauvin was convicted, the state asked for a lengthier sentence should he be convicted of any of the charges -- what is known as an ''upward sentencing departure'' -- citing aggravating factors including, the state has said in court filings, that the killing of Mr. Floyd happened in the presence of children, that Mr. Floyd was treated with ''particular cruelty'' by Mr. Chauvin, and that Mr. Chauvin, as a police officer, ''abused his position of authority.''  Mr. Chauvin had the option of having the jury rule on the aggravating factors or putting it in the hands of Judge Cahill. At the end of closing arguments on Monday, Mr. Chauvin waived his right to have the jury decide, putting the decision on sentencing solely in the hands of Judge Cahill.  Women embraced outside the Hennepin County Government Center after the guilty verdicts were announced. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amr Alfiky/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00044 "
391		"    Big Tech's Clout Is Challenged Across the Globe  By Paul Mozur, Cecilia Kang, Adam Satariano and David McCabe  1,865 words 21 April 2021   1     China fined the internet giant Alibaba a record $2.8 billion this month for anticompetitive practices, ordered an overhaul of its sister financial company and warned other technology firms to obey Beijing's rules.  Now the European Commission plans to unveil far-reaching regulations to limit technologies powered by artificial intelligence.  And in the United States, President Biden has stacked his administration with trustbusters who have taken aim at Amazon, Facebook and Google.  Around the world, governments are moving simultaneously to limit the power of tech companies with an urgency and breadth that no single industry had experienced before. Their motivation varies. In the United States and Europe, it is concern that tech companies are stifling competition, spreading misinformation and eroding privacy; in Russia and elsewhere, it is to silence protest movements and tighten political control; in China, it is some of both.  While nations and tech firms have jockeyed for primacy for years, the latest actions have pushed the industry to a tipping point that could reshape how the global internet works and change the flows of digital data.  Australia passed a law to force Google and Facebook to pay publishers for news. Britain is creating its own tech regulator to police the industry. India adopted new powers over social media. Russia throttled Twitter's traffic. And Myanmar and Cambodia put broad internet restrictions in place.  China, which had left its tech companies free to compete and consolidate, tightened restrictions on digital finance and sharpened an antimonopoly law late last year. This year, it began compelling internet firms like Alibaba, Tencent and ByteDance to publicly promise to follow its rules against monopolies.  ''It is unprecedented to see this kind of parallel struggle globally,'' said Daniel Crane, a law professor at the University of Michigan and an antitrust expert. American trustbusting of steel, oil and railroad companies in the 19th century was more confined, he said, as was the regulatory response to the 2008 financial crisis.  Now, Mr. Crane said, ''the same fundamental question is being asked globally: Are we comfortable with companies like Google having this much power?''  Underlying all of the disputes is a common thread: power. The 10 largest tech firms, which have become gatekeepers in commerce, finance, entertainment and communications, now have a combined market capitalization of more than $10 trillion. In gross domestic product terms, that would rank them as the world's third-largest economy.  Yet while governments agree that tech clout has grown too expansive, there has been little coordination on solutions. Competing policies have led to geopolitical friction. Last month, the Biden administration said it could put tariffs on countries that imposed new taxes on American tech companies.  The result is that the internet as it was originally conceived -- a borderless digital space where ideas of all stripes contend freely -- may not survive, researchers said. Even in parts of the world that do not censor their digital spaces, they said, a patchwork of rules would give people different access to content, privacy protections and freedoms online depending on where they logged on.  ''The idea of an open and interoperable internet is being exposed as incredibly fragile,'' said Quinn McKew, executive director of Article 19, a digital rights advocacy group.  Tech companies are fighting back. Amazon and Facebook have created their own entities to adjudicate conflicts over speech and to police their sites. In the United States and in the European Union, the companies have spent heavily on lobbying.  Some of them, acknowledging their power, have indicated support for more regulations while also warning about the consequences of a splintered internet.  ''The decisions lawmakers make in the months and years ahead will have a profound impact on the internet, international alliances and the global economy,'' said Nick Clegg, Facebook's vice president of policy and communications.  Mr. Clegg, a former British deputy prime minister, added that Facebook hoped ''the techno-democracies in the U.S., Europe, India and elsewhere'' would ''work together to preserve and enhance the democratic values at the heart of the open internet and prevent it from fragmenting further.''  Kent Walker, Google's senior vice president of global affairs, also called for nations to coordinate. ''Balkanized, inconsistent regulations won't help and could actually make things worse,'' he said. ''But done right, well-aligned rules can promote innovation, increase competitiveness and help consumers and small businesses.''  Amazon said it welcomed scrutiny, but ''the presumption that success can only be the result of anticompetitive behavior is simply wrong.''  Apple, Alibaba, its sister financial company Ant Group, and the Chinese gaming and social media giant Tencent, which owns the WeChat app, declined to comment.  While a tech backlash has gathered momentum for years, it escalated in December. That was when regulators and lawmakers globally made a series of announcements on two main paths of attack against the industry: antitrust and content moderation.  On Dec. 9, the Federal Trade Commission and nearly every state filed bipartisan lawsuits accusing Facebook of acting anticompetitively. Less than a week later, European policymakers introduced a competition law and new requirements for blocking online hate speech. On Dec. 24, Chinese regulators opened an antitrust investigation into Alibaba after scuppering an initial public offering from Ant.  Antitrust and content moderation have been where tech companies are most vulnerable. Google, Facebook, Apple, Alibaba, Amazon and other companies clearly dominate online advertising, search, e-commerce and app marketplaces, and have faced questions about whether they have unduly used their clout to buy competitors, promote their own products ahead of others and block rivals.  The companies also face scrutiny about how hate speech and other noxious online material can spill into the offline world, leading to calls to better control content.  The antitrust push has especially sharpened in the United States, with landmark suits filed against Google and Facebook last year. Republican and Democratic lawmakers have said they are drafting new antitrust, privacy and speech regulations targeting Facebook, Google, Apple and Amazon. They have also proposed trimming a law that shields sites like YouTube, which Google owns, from lawsuits over content posted by their users.  ''This is a monopoly moment. Not just for the United States but for the entire world,'' the chairman of the House antitrust subcommittee, David Cicilline, Democrat of Rhode Island, said in a statement. ''Countries need to work together in order to take on the monopoly power held by the largest tech platforms and restore competition and innovation to the digital economy.''  Mr. Biden has also picked tech critics for key administration roles. Tim Wu, a law professor who supports a breakup of Facebook, joined the White House last month, while Lina Khan, a law professor who has been influential on tech antitrust, was nominated to a seat on the Federal Trade Commission.  In Brussels, European Union officials are working on new laws to force Facebook, Twitter and YouTube to speedily remove toxic material and disclose more information about what they allow on their sites. A proposed antitrust law would also lower the threshold for intervention against platforms.  European officials are also taking aim at emerging technologies before they become mainstream. Draft regulations, to be released on Wednesday, will address the risks of artificial intelligence, potentially restricting how companies use the software to make decisions and influence people's behavior.  ''As the power of digital platforms has grown, it's become increasingly clear that we need something more to keep that power in check,'' Margrethe Vestager, the European Commission executive vice president overseeing digital policy, said in a recent speech.  Some tech companies have issued legal threats and ultimatums against the new rules. But they have also bowed to government demands in several countries.  Australia offers a glimpse of that. Over the last year, the country dueled with Google and Facebook over a proposed law that would require them to pay news publishers for content shared on their platforms. To protest the legislation, Google threatened to make its search engine unavailable in Australia. In February, Facebook blocked the sharing of news links completely.  Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web and a critic of tech power, said he opposed the Australian law because people would not be able to link freely on the web. He called that ''inconsistent with how the web has been able to operate over the past three decades.''  Australia passed the law anyway. Facebook and Google are now paying some media companies for news.  The starkest turn against the tech companies has been in China. For years, Beijing blocked foreign websites and policed content on domestic platforms, but let homegrown tech firms like Alibaba and Tencent buy rivals, develop new products and expand.  That changed last year. In regulatory and legal proposals, Beijing telegraphed its desire to bring to heel an industry characterized by cutthroat competition and huge influence over sensitive political issues like labor and data security.  Even so, few were prepared for the whip-crack speed of Beijing's enforcement. In November, officials halted Ant's initial public offering days before it was scheduled, then opened the antimonopoly investigation into Alibaba in December. The one-two punch was a shocking blow to Jack Ma, Alibaba's founder and an entrepreneurial icon, who in October had riled state media after he likened state-run banks to pawnshops.  Beijing ratcheted up pressure on Mr. Ma's companies this month with the $2.8 billion fine of Alibaba. On April 12, China also ordered Ant to undergo a ''rectification plan'' to change the way it runs investment and credit products.  The next day, regulators summoned 34 of China's largest internet firms, including Tencent and ByteDance, the owner of the video site TikTok, and instructed them to ''give full play to the cautionary example of the Alibaba case.'' The companies were given a month to conduct a self-inspection and publicly promise to curb anticompetitive behavior and follow Chinese laws on everything from data protection and taxes to speech.  Within a day, ByteDance had pledged to ''actively follow the guidance of law enforcement.'' Baidu, a search engine, vowed to ''resolutely curb false propaganda.''  ''China's leaders take very seriously having a subservient, quiescent private sector,'' said Jude Blanchette, a China scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.  Even before the meeting, at least one Chinese tech executive had gotten the message. On a call with analysts last month, Martin Lau, Tencent's president, struck a conciliatory tone toward the authorities.  ''I think it's important for us to understand even more about what the government is concerned about,'' he said. Tencent, he added, will ''be even more compliant.''  Margrethe Vestager, left, a European Commission official, has said that digital platforms need to be reined in. Center, Tim Wu, a law professor who supports a breakup of Facebook, joined the White House in March. Right, an Apple Store in Beijing. Regulators have examined whether Apple uses its App Store to overcharge developers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY OLIVER HOSLET; VALERIE CHIANG FOR THE new_york_times; LAM YIK FEI FOR THE new_york_times) (A12)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004w "
392		"    Biden Will Pledge to Cut Planet-Warming Emissions Nearly in Half by 2030  By Lisa Friedman and Coral Davenport  852 words 21 April 2021   20     The president will commit the United States to deep cuts in emissions at an Earth Day summit meeting that starts on Thursday, according to people familiar with the plan.  WASHINGTON -- President Biden will announce Thursday that the United States intends to cut planet-warming emissions nearly in half by the end of the decade, a target that would require Americans to transform the way they drive, heat their homes and manufacture goods.  The target, confirmed by three people briefed on the plan, is timed to a closely watched global summit meeting that Mr. Biden is hosting Thursday and Friday, which is aimed at sending a message that the United States is rejoining international efforts to fight global warming after four years of climate denial from the Trump administration.  A White House spokesman declined to comment on the U.S. target, which was first reported by The Washington Post.  The leaders of China, India and nearly 40 other countries are expected to join Mr. Biden virtually, and the United States hopes that the announcement of its new emissions goal will galvanize other nations to step up their own targets by the time nations gather again under United Nations auspices in November in Glasgow.  The new American goal nearly doubles the pledge that the Obama administration made to cut emissions 26 percent to 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025, although the country would have five more years to achieve it, according to the people familiar with the target who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss it. Formally known as a ''nationally determined contribution'' under the Paris Agreement the 2030 target will be a range that will aim to cut emissions around 50 percent from 2005 levels. It will not include detailed modeling showing how the United States proposes to meet its pledge, one administration official said.  The goal is largely in line with what environmental groups and big businesses including McDonalds, Target and Google have pushed for. They and others argued that cutting emissions at least 50 percent from 2005 levels by the end of the decade is the only way to put the United States on a path to elimination of fossil fuel pollution by the middle of the century.  On Tuesday, Gina McCarthy, Mr. Biden's top climate change adviser, hinted that the United States would set that ambitious goal.  ''I would argue that there's opportunities for us to be able to be very aggressive, and we're going to take that opportunity,'' she said in an interview with N.P.R.  Meeting it, however, will be a steep challenge.  Nathan Hultman, director of the Center for Global Sustainability at the University of Maryland, and other energy experts described the 50 percent goal as attainable, but only with what Mr. Hultman described as ''pretty significant action across all sectors of the American economy.''  The credibility of Mr. Biden's pledge rests on his ability to enact a series of aggressive new domestic policies designed to sharply reduce emissions, particularly from the nation's two largest sources of greenhouse pollution, cars and power plants.  Ms. McCarthy is working with the heads of the Environmental Protection Agency and Transportation Department to draft new regulations on smokestacks and automobile tailpipes, which could be made public by this summer.  But other countries remain skeptical of the durability of such rules, given their experience with the Trump administration. As head of the Environmental Protection Agency in the Obama administration, Ms. McCarthy wrote similar rules, only to see them obliterated.  ''The most important part of anything that they do is to make sure that it's durable,'' said Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton University. ''We really need to show in some very tangible way that the particulars can't be reversed on a dime and we don't have that.''  The administration is also trying to push a $2.3 trillion infrastructure package through Congress, which includes plans to spend heavily on projects like electric vehicle charging stations and expanding transmission lines for wind and solar electricity.  Many Democrats hope that the plan will include a mandate requiring power companies to generate a certain percentage of their electricity from wind and solar, inscribing into law a transition away from fossil fuels that could not be undone by a future president.  But the prospects for passage of that plan in Congress remain unclear. Some Republicans have offered tentative support for a compromise infrastructure bill that would include more traditional projects like highways and bridges but leave out the climate provisions.  That would give Mr. Biden a bipartisan victory on a major domestic policy but leave the United States without a permanent, irreversible climate law.  A power plant in New York City this week. The cuts would require Americans to transform the way they drive, heat their homes and manufacture goods. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Justin Lane/EPA, via Shutterstock FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003t "
393		"    Georgia Law Is Focus Of Senate Democrats In Voting Rights Push  By Nicholas Fandos  1,359 words 21 April 2021   22     Democrats pushing a giant federal elections overhaul summoned leaders from the state, which has passed new voting restrictions, to spar over Republican efforts.  Senate Democrats on Tuesday renewed their push for a national expansion of voting rights, summoning leaders from the battleground state of Georgia to help build a public case that Congress should intervene to lower state barriers to voting.  At a heated hearing on Capitol Hill, senators quizzed elected officials, academics and advocates on the state's new election law and dozens of others like it introduced in Republican statehouses since the 2020 election that would restrict ballot access. Their lead witness was Stacey Abrams, the Georgia voting rights activist who has arguably done more than any other Democrat to frame her party's views of voting issues.  Over four hours of testimony, Ms. Abrams argued that Republican-led states like hers across the country were witnessing ''a resurgence of Jim Crow-style voter suppression measures'' targeting voters of color. She accused Republicans of acting with ''racial animus'' to tilt the electorate in their favor after former President Donald J. Trump lost Georgia and baselessly claimed he had been the victim of election fraud.  She warned that decades of gains could be rolled back if Congress did not step in.  ''When the fundamental right to vote is left to the political ambitions and prejudices of state actors, ones who rely on suppression to maintain power, federal intercession stands as the appropriate remedy,'' Ms. Abrams said.  Though the hearing before the Judiciary Committee was not specifically tied to legislation, it was part of a push by Democrats to use their hold in Washington to advance a pair of major voting bills that could counter hundreds of restrictive proposals in the states.  The first is a gigantic national elections overhaul, known as H.R. 1, that would force states to expand early voting and mail-in balloting, mandate automatic voter registration and neuter restrictive voter identification laws, among other measures.  The second bill, named after the civil rights icon John Lewis, would restore a key enforcement provision in the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that made it harder for states to target voters of color. It was struck down in 2013 by the Supreme Court.  Republicans oppose both bills, but have trained their ire most directly on the election overhaul, which also includes a new public campaign financing system and a revamp of the Federal Election Commission. On Tuesday, they called it a gross federal overreach intended to help Democrats consolidate power, rejected accusations of racism and renewed vows to help defeat it in the evenly divided Senate.  ''H.R. 1 is not about righting wrongs,'' said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina. ''It's about power.''  In a sign of how polarized the debate over voting has become, the two parties even sparred over the title of the hearing itself. Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the chairman of the panel, had labeled it ''Jim Crow 2021: The Latest Assault on the Right to Vote.'' Republicans called that historically inaccurate and accused Democrats -- including President Biden -- of cheapening the stain of violent racial oppression by comparing it to voting laws of today.  ''It's disgusting and offensive to compare the actual voter suppression and violence of that era that we grew up in with a state law that only asks people to show their ID,'' said Representative Burgess Owens, Republican of Utah, adding that he had ''actually experienced Jim Crow laws'' as a child in the South.  Mr. Durbin conceded that Jim Crow ''at its worst was more violent than the situation we face today.'' But he insisted the goal was much the same.  ''The bottom-line question, which we are addressing in this hearing, is whether there is a design or intent in legislation that is being passed in many states, including the state of Georgia, to limit or restrict the rights to vote of minority populations,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''I think that goes without saying.''  Republicans' unified opposition spells certain trouble for any significant federal voting legislation. Democrats would have to persuade all 50 of their senators to vote for the bill and create a carve-out in Senate rules to pass it with just a simple majority, relying on Vice President Kamala Harris's tiebreaking vote. But for now, Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, has rejected that approach and called for bipartisan negotiations.  Democrats' attempts to renew the Voting Rights Act appear to face odds just as steep. Republicans no longer believe it necessary to restore the stricken provision, which required federal approval of changes to voting procedures in parts of the country with a history of discrimination.  Without it, voting rights advocates say they have seen a proliferation of restrictive state voting laws like Georgia's and must spend years in court trying to undo statutes that run afoul of the Constitution.  ''Litigation is a blunt instrument,'' said Sherrilyn Ifill, the president of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. ''What pre-clearance gave us was to get out ahead of voter discrimination before it happened.''  Republicans repeatedly turned to their own witnesses to push back on Democrats' proposals, including Bill Gardner, New Hampshire's long-serving top elections official and a Democrat. Mr. Gardner argued that his party's attempted overhaul would backfire.  ''Why should we be made to be like California in particular or other states?'' Mr. Gardner said. ''We have a way of doing it that works for the people of New Hampshire. The turnout is the proof that it works, and this kind of federal legislation is harmful to our way of voting.''  Jan Jones, the Republican speaker pro tempore of the Georgia House, mounted an energetic defense of her state's new election law, saying that Republicans were merely ''making it easier to vote and harder to cheat.''  She said a provision barring third-party groups from providing food and water to voters waiting in line to cast their ballots was not a draconian tactic to suppress turnout, but an attempt to stop activists and candidates from using food and other goodies to sway voters.  A new_york_times analysis identified 16 provisions in the Georgia law that either hinder people's ability to vote or shift power to the Republican-controlled legislature.  Republican senators appeared just as eager to directly question Ms. Abrams, a Democratic star who may run again for governor in Georgia next year. Mr. Graham and Senator John Cornyn of Texas peppered her with questions that sought to portray her assertions about voter identification laws as contradictory, and her condemnation of Georgia's statute as hypocritical.  ''So voter ID is sometimes racist, sometimes not racist?'' Mr. Cornyn asked, in a lengthy exchange.  ''The intent always matters, sir, and that is the point of this conversation,'' Ms. Abrams responded, saying that she supported some voter ID laws. ''That is the point of the Jim Crow narrative. That Jim Crow did not simply look at the activities, it looked at the intent.''  Polling shows that the public generally supports such laws, but voting rights advocates argue they can make it harder for some people of color to vote.  Mr. Cornyn kept rephrasing the question. Ms. Abrams pushed back.  ''Senator, I am happy to respond to your questions, but if you are going to mischaracterize my responses, that's inappropriate,'' she said.  Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, pinned blame on Ms. Abrams for Major League Baseball's decision to move this summer's All-Star Game from Georgia, saying her public criticism of the voting bill had played a ''central role'' in a decision that could cost her state economically.  Ms. Abrams vehemently disagreed, saying she had opposed the league's move, but would stand by anyone defending the right to vote.  ''To me, one day of games is not worth losing our democracy,'' she said.  Senators called Stacey Abrams, the Georgia voting rights activist, to testify remotely on Tuesday. (POOL  BY BILL CLARK)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003z "
394		"    Climate Change Adviser Gets Another Chance to Tackle Global Warming  By Coral Davenport  1,640 words 21 April 2021   21     Gina McCarthy, Barack Obama's E.P.A. chief, could only watch as the Trump administration dismantled her climate work. Now, she's back with another chance to build a lasting legacy.  WASHINGTON -- Gina McCarthy worked six or seven days a week, 12 to 14 hours a day, to produce America's first real effort to combat climate change, a suite of Obama-era regulations that would cut pollution from the nation's tailpipes and smokestacks and wean the world's largest economy from fossil fuels.  Then the administration of Donald J. Trump shredded the work of President Barack Obama's Environmental Protection Agency chief before any of it could take effect.  Ms. McCarthy is back, as President Biden's senior climate change adviser, and this time, she is determined to make it stick.  She is the most powerful climate change official in the country other than Mr. Biden himself, and her charge is not simply to reconstruct her Obama-era policies but to lead an entire government to tackle global warming, from the nation's military to its diplomatic corps to its Treasury and Transportation Department. She will also lead negotiations with Congress for permanent new climate change laws that could withstand the next change of administration.  ''I've got a small stronghold office, but I am an orchestra leader for a very large band,'' Ms. McCarthy, 66, said in a speech in February.  Mr. Biden's two-day global climate summit meeting, which begins Thursday, is his chance to proclaim America's return to the international effort to stave off the most devastating impacts of a warming planet, but it is Ms. McCarthy's re-emergence as well. Mr. Biden is expected to pledge that the United States will cut its planet-warming emissions by at least 50 percent below 2005 levels in the next decade.  The world has seen such promises before, with the Kyoto accords in the 1990s, then the Paris Agreement in the Obama era, only to see them discarded by subsequent Republican administrations. It will fall to Ms. McCarthy to prove the skeptics wrong.  Washington ''has offered nothing on how it plans to make up for the lost four years,'' said the spokesman for China's Foreign Ministry, Zhao Lijian, on Friday.  The administration plans concurrent efforts to enact regulations to curb auto and power plant emissions, restrict fossil fuel development and conserve public lands while pressing Congress to pass the climate provisions in Mr. Biden's $2 trillion infrastructure bill, such as renewable power and electric vehicle programs. Ms. McCarthy hopes to push the infrastructure bill further, possibly by mandating that power companies produce a certain percentage of their electricity from renewable sources such as wind and solar. That will be a tough sell to many Republicans -- but if it passes Congress, it could stand as the Biden administration's permanent climate legacy, even if other rules are swept away by future presidents.  ''What Gina succeeds in pulling together is essential to our ability to have credibility in the world,'' John Kerry, a former secretary of state and now Mr. Biden's international climate envoy, said in January. ''And nobody knows the details better than she does, and nobody is going to be more effective in corralling everybody to move in the same direction.''  Ms. McCarthy, who spent the Trump administration first as a visiting fellow at Harvard and then as the head of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an advocacy group, said that, for the most part, she didn't take the demolition of her work personally.  ''But I was offended,'' she said in a recent interview.  She said she poured enormous effort into creating Obama-era rules that could pass muster with the courts and ease into effect, only to watch them undone by Trump-era climate rollbacks that were slapped together, rife with spelling and math errors, and then promptly bogged down in court.  ''It was almost embarrassing,'' she said. ''It was naïve. It was so poorly written. It had political statements in it. It was just outrageous.''  There was, however, some comfort in that. ''I knew there was no way this would stand the test of time,'' she said. ''I knew that it could be rebuilt.''  Ms. McCarthy's friends say she is driven to build back a climate legacy that will outlast her second round in government.  ''She was angry, there's no question about that,'' said Mitchell Bernard, president of the Natural Resources Defense Council. ''I heard many an expletive exit her mouth about what was going on in the government.''  During the 2020 presidential campaign, Ms. McCarthy worked with liberal activists to push Mr. Biden to embrace a far more ambitious climate plan than he first proposed -- and to make it the centerpiece of his governing agenda.  It was Ms. McCarthy who was saying, ''We absolutely can go bigger and should be asking for more,'' said Evan Weber, the political director of Sunrise Movement, the progressive environmental group. ''She wanted us to see the connections between environmental justice and racism and what was happening between Covid and the environmental crisis, and I thought, 'Damn, that sounds like an activist.'''  When Mr. Biden asked her to join his White House, Ms. McCarthy said she was initially reluctant. But when he embraced much of the rhetoric and policies of the party's left, she was won over.  ''When President, then candidate, Biden made the connection between climate and health and environmental and racial justice, and he framed it in terms of what needed to be done after the pandemic for job growth, it just -- it owned me,'' she said. ''It got me out of the drudgery of climate always being a planetary burden and a horrible potential future and brought it into a framing that to me, energized it.''  Republicans have taken notice, and they are not happy.  ''For almost two months now, unaccountable czar Gina McCarthy has been working both behind the scenes and in front of the press to lay the groundwork for the Biden administration's agenda,'' Senator Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, the ranking Republican on the Senate Environment Committee, said last month. ''She's wielding her power publicly to make it clear who's calling the shots and directing the troops.''  Ms. McCarthy, who has worked as a state and federal environmental regulator for nearly 40 years, is used to attacks from Republicans, and from the heads of the polluting industries that she has spent a career trying to rein in. But over those decades, she has won the grudging respect of some chief executives who have met her across negotiating tables.  ''She was always willing to roll up her sleeves and dig into issues and take it seriously,'' said Jeffrey Holmstead, a lawyer representing fossil fuel companies, who also served as a top E.P.A. official in the George W. Bush administration. ''She doesn't suffer fools lightly, but everybody always felt they had a fair hearing.''  He added, ''From the president's perspective, she is the ideal person in this job.''  Ms. McCarthy grew up in a working-class Irish Catholic family, just outside of Boston. Her mother worked in a doughnut factory and her father, a teacher, was in a union -- a background that she says has served her well in building strong relationships both with her current boss and with some of the Republicans and union groups whose support she hopes to win.  She spent 25 years as a health and environmental-protection official for Massachusetts, working for five governors, including Mitt Romney, a Republican who assigned her to write a state climate-change plan.  Now Senator Romney is among a handful of Republicans whom Mr. Biden sees as possible votes for his infrastructure bill.  She is also drawing from her working-class background to woo union leaders as she prepares to reinstate tough new rules on emissions from cars and coal-fired power plants, the nation's two largest sources of greenhouse pollution.  Coal workers attacked Ms. McCarthy's Obama-era climate rules as a ''war on coal'' and turned out in support of Mr. Trump, but this week, Cecil E. Roberts, the president of the United Mine Workers of America, said that his members would accept a transition away from fossil fuels in exchange for heavy government investment in new jobs in renewable energy, spending on technology to make coal cleaner and financial aid for miners who lose their jobs -- similar to some of the provisions in Mr. Biden's infrastructure package.  But autoworkers are worried: The White House climate plan envisions a future in which most Americans drive zero-emission electric vehicles, but building an electric vehicle requires about a third fewer workers than building a traditional combustion-engine vehicle.  ''I'm really impressed with her knowledge of what working life is for an autoworker,'' said Rory Gamble, president of the United Auto Workers, who has Ms. McCarthy's cellphone number. ''In sister McCarthy we find a well-educated ear who is in tune with what we are facing. I appreciate knowing that she has labor roots.''  But, he said, she has yet to persuade him that new pollution rules won't cost jobs.  ''The hurdle, and I've shared this with Gina, is if the government is going to get into this and invest money in this, there has to be assurances that this work stays in America, with good wages and good benefits, and the workers can organize. That's a lot of what-ifs there.''  Gina McCarthy has, over the decades, won the grudging respect of some chief executives who have met her across negotiating tables. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARAH BLESENER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003s "
395		"    A Year of Protest and Reform. What Now for Racial Justice?  By Audra D. S. Burch, Amy Harmon, Sabrina Tavernise and Emily Badger  2,164 words 21 April 2021   1     George Floyd had been dead only hours before the movement began. Driven by a terrifying video and word of mouth, people flooded the South Minneapolis intersection where he was killed shortly after Memorial Day, demanding an end to police violence against Black Americans.  The moment of collective grief and anger swiftly gave way to a yearlong, nationwide deliberation on what it means to be Black in America.  First came protests, in large cities and small towns across the nation, becoming the largest mass protest movement in U.S. history. Then, over the next several months, nearly 170 Confederate symbols were renamed or removed from public spaces. The ''Black lives matter'' slogan was claimed by a nation grappling with Mr. Floyd's death.  Over the next 11 months, calls for racial justice would touch seemingly every aspect of American life on a scale that historians say had not happened since the civil rights movement of the 1960s.  On Tuesday, Derek Chauvin, the white police officer who knelt on Mr. Floyd, was convicted of two counts of murder as well as manslaughter. The verdict brought some solace to activists for racial justice who had been riveted to the courtroom drama for the past several weeks.  But for many Black Americans, real change feels elusive, particularly given how relentlessly the killing of Black men by the police has continued, including the recent shooting death of Daunte Wright in a Minneapolis suburb.  There are also signs of backlash: Legislation that would reduce voting access, protect the police and effectively criminalize public protests has sprung up in Republican-controlled state legislatures.  Otis Moss III, pastor of Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago, said to call what had transpired over the past year a racial reckoning was not right.  ''Reckoning suggests that we are truly struggling with how to reimagine everything from criminal justice to food deserts to health disparities -- we are not doing that,'' he said. Tuesday's guilty verdict, he said, ''is addressing a symptom, but we have not yet dealt with the disease.''  Moments before the verdict was announced, Derrick Johnson, president of the N.A.A.C.P., called Mr. Floyd's death ''a Selma, Ala., moment for America.''  What happened in Selma in 1965 ''with the world watching demonstrated the need for the passage of the 1965 Voting Right Act,'' he said. ''What we witnessed last year with the killing of George Floyd should be the catalyst for broad reform in policing in this nation.''  The entire arc of the Floyd case -- from his death and the protests through the trial and conviction of Mr. Chauvin -- played out against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic, which further focused attention on the nation's racial inequities: People of color were among those hardest hit by the virus and by the economic dislocation that followed.  And for many, Mr. Floyd's death carried the weight of other episodes of police violence over the past decade, a list that includes the deaths of Eric Garner, Laquan McDonald, Michael Brown and Breonna Taylor.  In the months after Mr. Floyd's death, some change has been concrete. Scores of policing reform laws were introduced at the state level. Corporations pledged billions to racial equity causes, and the N.F.L. apologized for its failure to support protests against police violence by its Black players.  Even the backlash was different. Racist statements by dozens of public officials, from mayors to fire chiefs, related to Mr. Floyd's death -- perhaps tolerated before -- cost them their jobs and sent others to antiracism training.  And, at least at first, American views on a range of questions related to racial inequality and policing shifted to a degree rarely seen in opinion polling. Americans, and white Americans in particular, became much more likely than in recent years to support the Black Lives Matter movement, to say that racial discrimination is a big problem and to say that excessive police force disproportionately harms African-Americans.  Mr. Floyd's death, most Americans agreed early last summer, was part of a broader pattern -- not an isolated episode. A new_york_times poll of registered voters in June showed that more than one in 10 had attended protests. And at the time, even Republican politicians in Washington were voicing support for police reform.  But the shift proved fleeting for Republicans -- both elected leaders and voters. As some protests turned destructive and as President Donald J. Trump's re-election campaign began using those scenes in political ads, polls showed white Republicans retreating in their views that discrimination is a problem. Increasingly in the campaign, voters were given a choice: They could stand for racial equity or with law and order. Republican officials once vocal about Mr. Floyd fell silent.  ''If you were on the Republican side, which is really the Trump side of this equation, then the message became, 'No, we can't acknowledge that that was appalling because we will lose ground,''' said Patrick Murray, the director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute. '''Our worldview is it's us against them. And those protesters are going to be part of the them.'''  Mr. Floyd's death did, however, drive some changes, at least for now, among non-Republican white Americans in their awareness of racial inequality and support for reforms. And it helped cement the movement of college-educated suburban voters, already dismayed by what they saw as Mr. Trump's race-baiting, toward the Democratic Party.  ''The year 2020 is going to go down in our history books as a very significant, very catalytic time,'' said David Bailey, whose Richmond, Va.-based nonprofit, Arrabon, helps churches around the country do racial reconciliation work. ''People's attitudes have changed at some level. We don't know fully all of what that means. But I am hopeful I am seeing something different.''  ï»¿But even among Democratic leaders, including mayors and President Biden, dismay over police violence has often been paired with warnings that protesters avoid violence, too. That association -- linking Black political anger and violence -- is deeply rooted in America and has not been broken in the past year, said Davin Phoenix, a political scientist at the University of California, Irvine.  ''Before Black people even get a chance to process their feelings of trauma and grief, they're being told by people they elected to the White House -- that they put into power -- 'Don't do this, don't do that,''' Mr. Phoenix said. ''I would love if more politicians, at least those that claim to be allied, turn to the police and say, 'Don't do this, don't do that.'''  The protests that followed Mr. Floyd's death became part of the increasingly acrimonious American conversation over politics. Most were peaceful, but there was looting and property damage in some cities, and those images circulated frequently on television and social media.  Republicans cited the protests as an example of the left losing control. Blue Lives Matter flags hung from houses last fall. When support for Mr. Trump boiled over into violence at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, conservatives expressed anger at what they said was a double standard for how the two movements had been treated.  Mr. Biden took office in January vowing to make racial equity central to every element of his agenda -- to how coronavirus vaccines are distributed, where federal infrastructure is built, how climate policies are crafted. He quickly made changes any Democratic administration most likely would have made, restoring police consent decrees and fair housing rules.  But, in a sign of the unique moment in which Mr. Biden was elected -- and his debt to Black voters in elevating him -- his administration has also made more novel moves, like declaring racism a serious threat to public health and singling out Black unemployment as a gauge of the economy's health.  What opinion polling has not captured well is whether white liberals will change the behaviors -- like opting for segregated schools and neighborhoods -- that reinforce racial inequality. Even as the outcry over Mr. Floyd's death has raised awareness of it, other trends tied to the pandemic have only exacerbated that inequality. That has been true not just as Black families and workers have been disproportionately hurt by the pandemic, but also as white students have fared better amid remote education and as white homeowners have gained wealth in a frenzied housing market.  In a national sample of white Americans this year, Jennifer Chudy, a political scientist at Wellesley College, found that even the most racially sympathetic were more likely to endorse limited, private actions. These included educating oneself about racism or listening to people of color, rather than, for example, choosing to live in a racially diverse community or bringing racial issues to the attention of elected officials and policymakers.  Still, historians say it is hard to overstate the galvanizing effect of Mr. Floyd's death on public discourse, not just on policing but also on how racism is embedded in the policies of public and private institutions.  Some Black business leaders have spoken in unusually personal terms about their own experiences with racism, with some calling out the business world for doing far too little over the years -- ''Corporate America has failed Black America,'' said Darren Walker, the president of the Ford Foundation and a board member at PepsiCo, Ralph Lauren and Square -- and dozens of brands made commitments to diversify their work forces.  Public outcries over racism in the United States erupted across the world, spurring protest in the streets of Berlin, London, Paris and Vancouver, British Columbia, and in capitals in Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. White Americans unfamiliar with the concept of structural racism drove books on the topic to the top of best-seller lists.  The protests against police violence over the last year were more racially diverse than those that followed other police shootings of Black men, women and children over the past decade, said Robin D.G. Kelley, a historian of protest movements at the University of California, Los Angeles. And unlike in the past, they propelled defunding the police -- the most far-reaching demand to transform policing -- to the mainstream.  ''We had more organizing, more people in the streets, more people saying, 'It's not enough to fix the system, it needs to be taken down and replaced,''' Dr. Kelley said.  Organizers worked to turn the energy of the protests into real political power by pushing vast voter registrations. By the fall, racial justice was a campaign issue too. Mostly Democratic candidates addressed racial disparities in their campaigns, including calling for police reform, the dismantling of cash bail systems and the creation of civilian review boards.  ''We will forever look back at this moment in American history. George Floyd's death created a new energy around making changes, though it's not clear how lasting they will be,'' said Rashad Robinson, president of Color of Change. ''His death pushed racial justice to the forefront and brought a multiracial response like never before, but we must remember this is about making Chauvin accountable and the work of making systemic changes.''  One clear policy outcome has been changes to policing. More than 30 states have passed new police oversight and reform laws since Mr. Floyd's killing, giving states more authority and putting long-powerful police unions on the defensive. The changes include restricting the use of force, overhauling disciplinary systems, installing more civilian oversight and requiring transparency around misconduct cases.  Still, systems of policing are complex and entrenched, and it remains to be seen how much the legislation will change the way things work on the ground.  ''America is a deeply racist place and it's also progressively getting better -- both are true,'' said Mr. Bailey, the racial reconciliation worker in Richmond. ''You are talking about a 350-year problem that's only a little more than 50 years toward correction.''  David Gelles, Susan C. Beachy and Jonathan Abrams contributed reporting.  David Gelles, Susan C. Beachy and Jonathan Abrams contributed reporting.  George Floyd (PHOTOGRAPH BY OFFICES OF BEN CRUMP LAW) (A1); In the streets of Manhattan, top, at N.B.A. games and across the United States, the Black Lives Matter movement took hold last summer, leading some historians to say the push for racial justice was on a scale not seen since the civil rights movement of the 1960s. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEMETRIUS FREEMAN FOR THE new_york_times; ASHLEY LANDIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A18); The growing support for racial justice sprouted up on Times Square billboards and on handwritten signs that marked a memorial in Washington. Despite the heightened awareness, many Black Americans remain wary that real change will continue to be elusive. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DIA DIPASUPIL/GETTY IMAGES; DAMON WINTER/THE new_york_times) (A19)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003p "
396		"    Chauvin Guilty of Murder in Floyd's Death  By John Eligon, Tim Arango, Shaila Dewan and Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs  2,132 words 21 April 2021   1     A jury deliberated for just over 10 hours before pronouncing Mr. Chauvin guilty on all three charges: second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.  MINNEAPOLIS -- A former police officer who pressed his knee into George Floyd's neck until well past Mr. Floyd's final breath was found guilty of murder on Tuesday in a case that shook the nation's conscience and drew millions into the streets for the largest racial justice protests in generations.  The verdict, which could send the former officer, Derek Chauvin, to prison for decades, was a rare rebuke of police violence, following case after case of officers going without charges or convictions after killing Black men, women and children.  At the center of it all was an excruciating video, taken by a teenage girl, that showed Mr. Chauvin, who is white, kneeling on the neck of Mr. Floyd, who was Black, for nine minutes and 29 seconds as Mr. Floyd pleaded for his life and bystanders tried to intervene. Mr. Floyd repeated ''I can't breathe'' more than 20 times during the encounter.  The video, played on a horrifying loop for the past year, triggered more than calls for changes in policing. It stirred Americans of all races, in small towns and large cities, to gather for mass protests, chanting ''Black lives matter'' and challenging the country to finally have a true reckoning over race. Their demands reverberated within the walls of institutions that had long resisted change, from corporate America to Congress.  This week, over the course of two days, a racially diverse jury of seven women and five men deliberated for about 10 hours before pronouncing Mr. Chauvin guilty on all three charges: second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.  President Biden praised the verdict in a nationwide address at the White House but called it a ''too rare'' step to deliver ''basic accountability'' for Black Americans.  ''It was a murder in full light of day, and it ripped the blinders off for the whole world to see,'' Mr. Biden said. ''For so many, it feels like it took all of that for the judicial system to deliver just basic accountability.''  Hours before the jury came back with a decision, Mr. Biden had taken the unusual step of weighing in, telling reporters that he was ''praying'' for the ''right verdict.''  ''This can be a giant step forward in the march toward justice in America,'' he said.  After the verdict, Philonise Floyd, one of Mr. Floyd's younger brothers, spoke at the Hilton hotel in downtown Minneapolis. ''We are able to breathe again,'' he said, holding back tears.  He drew a line from his brother back to Emmett Till, a Black child who was lynched in Mississippi in 1955. ''We ought to always understand that we have to march,'' he said. ''We will have to do this for life. We have to protest because it seems like this is a never-ending cycle.''  People gathered at the intersection where Mr. Floyd was killed, now known as George Floyd Square, and the word ''Guilty'' rippled throughout the crowd after the verdict was announced, prompting cheers and sobs. The crowd began to chant, ''Black lives matter.''  Mr. Chauvin, who had been free on bail during the trial, was ordered into custody by the judge, Peter A. Cahill, and was taken out of the courtroom in handcuffs.  The verdict was hailed across the country by civil rights leaders and honking motorists. It gave a tense nation a moment to exhale, even as recent police killings in a Minneapolis suburb, Chicago and, on Tuesday afternoon, Columbus, Ohio, sent Americans back into the streets, holding signs that asked, ''How many more?''  The case was handled by the office of Attorney General Keith Ellison, the first Black man to hold statewide office in Minnesota. Prosecutors mounted perhaps the most ambitious and extensive case in any trial of an officer for an on-duty killing.  With a rotating cast of prominent lawyers, some of whom volunteered their services, the state presented 11 days of testimony from onlookers, paramedics, fellow police officers and a phalanx of medical experts armed with formulas, charts and timelines.  Among the state's star witnesses was the chief of the Minneapolis police, Medaria Arradondo, who said Mr. Chauvin had ''absolutely'' violated training, ethics and several department policies when he kept Mr. Floyd pinned facedown on the street long after he stopped breathing. It is exceedingly rare for a chief to testify against an officer from his own department.  The presumptive sentence for the most serious charge, second-degree murder, is 12.5 years, according to Minnesota's sentencing guidelines. But the prosecution has asked for a lengthier sentence, arguing that there were children present at the scene, that Mr. Chauvin treated Mr. Floyd with ''particular cruelty'' and that he ''abused his position of authority.''  The judge will sentence Mr. Chauvin, 45, in eight weeks.  George Floyd, 46, was a grandfather, a rapper known as Big Floyd and a security guard who had lost his job during the coronavirus pandemic. On the day he died -- May 25, 2020 -- the Minneapolis police responded to a call saying that he had used a counterfeit $20 bill to buy cigarettes at a corner store, Cup Foods.  Mr. Floyd initially cooperated with officers but he balked at getting into the back of a squad car, saying he was claustrophobic. A struggle ensued that resulted in three officers holding him prone on the street and one standing guard.  Mr. Chauvin was a field training officer and the senior officer at the scene, with 19 years on the force. As he knelt on Mr. Floyd, sometimes with both knees, he dismissed concerns or suggestions raised by the other officers that Mr. Floyd was passing out, had no detectable pulse and should be moved onto his side, a less dangerous position.  When Mr. Floyd said, ''You're going to kill me, man,'' Mr. Chauvin replied: ''Then stop talking, stop yelling. It takes a heck of a lot of oxygen to talk.''  Mr. Chauvin continued to kneel on him for about three minutes after Mr. Floyd drew his final breath, according to expert testimony.  The four officers involved were fired the next day. The other three -- Thomas Lane, J. Alexander Kueng and Tou Thao -- have been charged with aiding and abetting murder and are expected to be tried in August.  Prosecutors began their case against Mr. Chauvin with a series of eyewitnesses to Mr. Floyd's death, who offered emotional testimony about the trauma and guilt they were left with.  While Mr. Chauvin's lawyer, Eric J. Nelson, attempted to paint those bystanders -- who had been out to buy a cellphone cord or a drink, or just to take a walk -- as a dangerous and unruly mob, each offered an account of the desperation and helplessness he or she felt watching Mr. Floyd become unconscious beneath the officer's knee.  ''They saw that a human being they did not know was suffering,'' Jerry W. Blackwell, one of the prosecutors, said in his closing argument, calling them a ''bouquet of humanity.'' He added, ''And they wanted to try to intervene to stop the suffering.''  One of the witnesses that day, Charles McMillian, broke down on the witness stand as he recalled seeing Mr. Floyd cry out for ''Mama.'' Another witness, Darnella Frazier, who recorded the cellphone video that was viewed by millions, said she regretted that she had not done more to try to save Mr. Floyd.  ''It's been nights I stayed up apologizing and apologizing to George Floyd for not doing more and not physically interacting and not saving his life,'' Ms. Frazier said.  The trial was held in a closely guarded government building surrounded by high temporary fencing. Jurors were kept anonymous to protect them from potential threats. Because of the pandemic, Judge Cahill allowed the proceedings to be livestreamed, an exception to Minnesota's strict rules governing cameras in the courtroom. Jurors sat in chairs spaced six feet apart instead of close together in a traditional jury box, and only two spectators -- one from Mr. Floyd's family, one from Mr. Chauvin's -- were allowed to be present at a time.  The case continues to have broad effects on Minneapolis, where more than 1,000 buildings were damaged or destroyed by vandalism and looting in the unrest that followed Mr. Floyd's death. The Third Precinct building, which was set on fire, is boarded up. The intersection where Mr. Floyd was killed remains closed to traffic. And the city has endured an agonizing debate over the future of its Police Department.  Community activists celebrated the verdict, albeit gingerly. It was ''one trial and one moment in history,'' Nekima Levy Armstrong, a civil rights lawyer, said on Minnesota Public Radio. ''However, this moment didn't happen because the system worked,'' she added. ''This moment happened because the people put in the work. We had to demand justice and accountability.''  Mr. Ellison, whose office prosecuted the case, called it an ''inflection point'' and called for a broader shift in how the police interact with the communities they serve.  ''Although a verdict alone cannot end their pain, I hope it's another step on the long path toward healing for them,'' Mr. Ellison said of the Floyd family. ''There is no replacing your beloved Perry, or Floyd, as his friends called him, but he is the one who sparked a worldwide movement, and that's important.''  Before a jury had even been assembled, the prosecution, the defense and the judge sought to keep the trial's symbolic heft out of the courtroom.  With strong public opinions and an inescapable torrent of media coverage, the judge allotted three weeks for jury selection, allowing each side to question potential jurors one on one to determine if they could set aside their feelings about the case.  More than 300 Hennepin County residents summoned for jury duty filled out 14-page questionnaires asking them what they knew about the case and what their opinions were on the Black Lives Matter movement, the protests unleashed by Mr. Floyd's death and policing in general.  Mr. Chauvin's lawyer, Mr. Nelson, suggested to potential jurors that perhaps ''this case is not about race at all.'' During opening arguments he said, ''There is no political or social cause in this courtroom.''  The prosecution, for its part, said that policing itself was not on trial. ''The defendant is on trial not for being a police officer -- it's not the state versus the police,'' Steve Schleicher, a lawyer for the state, said in his closing argument. ''He's not on trial for who he was. He's on trial for what he did.''  The 12-person jury included three Black men, one Black woman and two women who identified as multiracial.  The trial centered on two issues: whether what Mr. Chauvin had done was reasonable given the situation, and whether he had caused Mr. Floyd's death. The defense argued that Mr. Floyd's heart disease, high blood pressure and other health conditions, as well as his use of methamphetamine and fentanyl, contributed to his death.  Though it presented dozens of witnesses, the prosecution ultimately asked jurors to focus on the central piece of evidence: the video taken by Ms. Frazier, which was shown repeatedly in court. ''Believe your eyes,'' the jury was told.  ''This case is exactly what you thought when you saw it first, when you saw that video,'' Mr. Schleicher said in the closing argument. ''It's what you felt in your gut. It's what you now know in your heart.''  Reporting was contributed by Andrés R. Martínez, Will Wright, Marie Fazio, Lucy Tompkins and Katie Rogers.  Reporting was contributed by Andrés R. Martínez, Will Wright, Marie Fazio, Lucy Tompkins and Katie Rogers.  Former Officer Derek Chauvin after his conviction on Tuesday in Minneapolis. Philonise Floyd, one of George Floyd's brothers, said, ''We are able to breathe again."" (A1); CONVICTED ON ALL THREE CHARGES: Derek Chauvin, who could face decades in prison, will be sentenced by the judge in eight weeks.; 'LONG PATH TOWARD HEALING': Keith Ellison, the Minnesota attorney general, called for a broader shift in how the police interact with the communities they serve. The team of prosecutors also included Steve Schleicher, far left, and Jerry W. Blackwell, third from left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STILL IMAGE, VIA COURT TV); AN EMOTIONAL DAY: Philonise Floyd drew a link between his brother and Emmett Till, a Black child lynched in Mississippi in 1955. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AARON NESHEIM FOR THE new_york_times) (A15)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003r "
397		"    Germany's Race for Chancellor Is a Contest of Generations and Ideologies  By Melissa Eddy  1,179 words 21 April 2021   12     The conservatives have been in power for the past 16 years, will the nation stick with them, or go Green?  BERLIN -- Germany's two leading parties, the Christian Democrats and the Greens, have finally decided who will compete to replace Chancellor Angela Merkel, setting up not only an ideological battle but a generational one as well.  Annalena Baerbock of the Greens is a 40-year-old woman who has never served in government, and is promising a new start for Germany. She faces Armin Laschet, a 60-year-old governor from Ms. Merkel's party who has pledged to continue the chancellor's mainstream conservative policies.  The election in September will be a pivotal one not just for Germany, but also for Europe. A new leader will be picked for the continent's most powerful economy, and one of its leading forces for democratic values, at a time when nationalist and populist movements are gaining force.  The question that many analysts have is whether Germans will vote for change, or stick with the policies of Ms. Merkel, which have delivered nearly two decades of economic strength and political stability.  ''Are Germans really ready to get out of their cocoon of the last 16 years,'' said Sudha David-Wilp, a trans-Atlantic fellow with the German Marshall Fund in Berlin. ''Are they really ready to meet head-on the kinds of challenges the Greens want to take on, like digital and energy transformation?''  While the Christian Democrats remain the strongest political force in the country, their socially conservative, pro-free market brand, rooted in traditional Christian values, has been badly battered by an inability to manage the latest waves of the coronavirus, a vaccine rollout plagued by a shortage of doses and an emphasis on bureaucratic detail over getting shots in arms.  Then, as Germans were wondering when they could get vaccinated and whether the schools would be forced to close yet again, a fierce battle broke out between Mr. Laschet, and his counterpart in the conservative party's Bavarian branch, Markus Söder, who enjoyed stronger popularity in the polls.  For a week, instead of focusing on changes to a law governing the pandemic, which Ms. Merkel insisted were needed to ensure the country could beat back a dangerous third wave, the conservatives were consumed with the battle between the two leaders.  Mr. Söder agreed to back down after senior conservatives threw their weight behind Mr. Laschet. But Mr. Laschet will now have to focus on reuniting the conservatives at a time when his disapproval rating in his home state stands at 69 percent.  In his acceptance speech on Tuesday, Mr. Laschet painted a vision of Germany as a diverse country, where everyone has a chance to follow their dreams, but gave few details of how the future would look. Instead he focused on the need for unity and rebuilding trust, both among conservatives and with voters.  ''The C.D.U. has never been a party of ideas,'' said Christian Odendahl, chief economist at the Center for European Reform, referring to the Christian Democratic Union by its initials. ''Does the C.D.U. even have a vision for the future of Germany?''  Without a clear vision, the conservatives risk losing young voters, many of whom have only really known a Germany led by Ms. Merkel. The conservative youth wing, which had backed Mr. Söder, chastised the Christian Democrats and their candidate, including for their chaotic video conference that began Monday evening and ended early Tuesday morning with the choice of Mr. Laschet.  ''This ability is needed now more than ever,'' the group said in a statement of the need to unify. ''Because yesterday evening's image was not that of an election winner, and we can't go into the election campaign like that -- in terms of organization and internal party dealings.''  Ms. Baerbock, by contrast, has her party fully behind her. She was chosen over her more experienced, male co-leader -- gender parity, including a male-female leadership duo, is one of the Greens' core policies. In her acceptance speech, she addressed the need to combat climate change, and reshape the country's political systems to meet the needs of Germans in the 21st century.  With a background in climate and human rights law, she is known as a strong networker and someone whose focus is on the people she represents. In her speech, she painted herself as a candidate who has only known a reunified Germany. She was open about her lack of experience in office, but cast it as an opportunity for a country that has been under the same management for a decade and a half.  ''A Green candidacy for chancellor stands for a new understanding of political leadership,'' Ms. Baerbock said. ''Decisive and transparent, capable of learning and self-critical. Democracy thrives on change.''  Although the two leading candidates are the strongest contenders for the race, Germany's finance minister, Olaf Scholz, 64, is also in the running for the Social Democrats. Traditionally the rivals of the Christian Democrats, with an emphasis on a strong safety net, the party has spent the past eight years relegated to being a junior partner in the chancellor's governments.  But in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, which has seen the government break its balanced budget to pay for 1.3 trillion euros, or $1.6 trillion, in compensation for the lockdowns and vaccines, the party could gain support with a smart campaign focused on social justice and Mr. Scholz' willingness to spend to keep people afloat.  With the conservatives polling just below 30 percent, the Greens hovering just above 20 percent, followed by the Social Democrats at around 18 percent, what seems clear is that whichever party wins the election will have to build a coalition to govern.  One idea has been that the Greens would become the junior partner in a conservative-led government that would be more environmentally focused than the coalitions of the conservatives and Social Democrats led by Ms. Merkel, but still heavily influenced by the Christian Democrats.  But even if the conservative bloc emerges as the strongest force, the Greens, as the second-strongest party, could try to build a progressive government together with the Social Democrats and one of the smaller parties, either the liberal Free Democrats or the Left party, forcing the conservatives into opposition.  All three leading parties have ruled out a coalition with the far-right Alternative for Germany, which wound up the biggest party in opposition after the Social Democrats joined the Christian Democrats in government in 2017.  ''If they have the numbers, the Greens would have to be mad to turn down an opportunity to form a progressive government such as this,'' Mr. Odendahl said. ''A conservative-Green government would be the status quo with a Green tinge.''  The Chancellery in Berlin is seen at night in February. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Annegret Hilse/Reuters FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0004a "
398		"    Florida's Restrictive Voting Bill Advances  By Nick Corasaniti  781 words 21 April 2021   22     The bill, which was recently softened, still includes measures like a ban on outside groups giving water to voters near polling places, and it would also empower partisan observers during the ballot-counting process.  A bill that would impose a host of new restrictions on voting in Florida passed a key committee in the State Senate on Tuesday after a fiery debate among senators and hours of citizen testimony opposing the measure. The vote set the stage for a possible full floor vote in the Republican-controlled chamber in the coming weeks.  The bill, known as S.B. 90, had significantly been revised last week by Dennis K. Baxley, the Republican state senator who introduced it, to roll back some of the more strident restrictions in the original bill, like banning drop boxes. It passed the Senate Rules Committee on Tuesday along a mostly party-line vote, with one Republican member of the committee, Jeff Brandes, voting against it.  The measure also bars outside groups from giving water to voters within 150 feet of a voting location; adds more identification requirements for absentee ballots; requires voters to request an absentee ballot every election rather than be on an absentee voting list; limits who can collect and drop off ballots; and empowers partisan observers during the ballot tabulating process.  Florida, a major political battleground, is one of a number of Republican-controlled states, including Georgia, Texas and Arizona, that have marched forward with new bills seeking to limit access to voting. Republicans did well in Florida in 2020, with former President Donald J. Trump winning by more than 370,000 votes.  Mr. Baxley, in introducing the bill, said that Florida's election last year was the ''gold standard'' for the country, but that the new voting law was necessary to avoid potential problems.  But the successful election in Florida was the reason that Democrats, as well as at least one Republican, pushed back on a lot of the provisions in the law. The newly amended bill that was passed limits the availability of drop boxes to early voting hours, rather than the 24-hour option that existed last year.  Democratic senators, including Randolph Bracy, noted that there had been no evidence of any tampering with drop boxes, which was later confirmed in testimony by local election officials.  Mr. Baxley replied simply that ''things could happen.''  The Republican sponsor did relent on one provision: requiring a ''wet signature'' (one handwritten using a pen or pencil) on file for voters who cast their ballots by mail for signature matching, rather than digital signatures, many of which are collected at Department of Motor Vehicle offices around the state.  After intense debate and pressure, including from Republican senators, Mr. Baxley said on Tuesday morning that ''by listening to others, and understanding your heart, I'm willing, and this Senate is willing, to take it out.''  The bill was originally set for a vote last Wednesday, but the debate ran past the allotted meeting time and was abruptly gaveled to a close. The Senate Rules Committee picked up the final debate early Tuesday.  During the public testimony last week, dozens of Florida voters spoke against the bill, as well as some local election officials, who took particular issue with the provision granting more authority to partisan poll watchers.  Mr. Brandes, in his closing remarks on Tuesday morning, noted that election officials across the state had voiced opposition to the bill.  ''I need to put on the record that to my knowledge, not one Republican supervisor of elections in the state of Florida supports this bill in its current form,'' he said.  The lengthy debate last Wednesday grew heated at times, as Democrats grew frustrated with what they viewed as evasive answers from Mr. Baxley.  ''These are the most nonsensical, off-point answers I think I've ever heard to questions in my life,'' said Gary Farmer, the Democratic minority leader in the State Senate.  The bill that passed through committee on Tuesday brings the Senate effort more in line with a similar bill that has been introduced in the House by Blaise Ingoglia, a Republican representative from the Gulf Coast. The House bill, which passed a key House committee in March, also awaits a full vote later this month.  The Florida Legislature is in session this year only through the end of April, so any bills will need to be passed by both chambers before May 1.  A line of early voters in Largo, Fla., in November. A Florida bill would limit hours for drop boxes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVE EDELHEIT FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00047 "
399		"   OFF THE MENU Iris, From John Fraser, Opens in Midtown Manhattan  By Florence Fabricant  1,057 words 21 April 2021   6     An Eataly restaurant teams up with Color Factory, mostly vegan selections from Baja California, and more restaurant news.  Headliner  Iris  With its November opening derailed by the pandemic, this elegant addition to Midtown Manhattan dining, from the chef and restaurateur John Fraser, is now ready for business. The food makes clear Mr. Fraser's Greek heritage, something that was less evident in his other ventures, like the Loyal and the North Fork Table, which he recently reopened in Southold, N.Y. You also may have sampled some of his Greek dishes at Snack Taverna in the West Village. He calls his new restaurant ''a bit of a homecoming,'' he said. ''It's the food I really love.'' Among the dishes are tzatziki flecked with sorrel; lamb tartare with ramp labneh; lemon potato salad; sweetbread kokoretsi with purslane and lemon; snapper braised with leeks and Kalamata olives; lamb marinated in mastic and served with scallion pancakes. And it's not just about Greece. There are Turkish flatbreads and lamb meatballs. The executive chef is Rob Lawson, who was with Mr. Fraser at 701West in the Times Square Edition. With his beverage director, Amy Racine, Mr. Fraser has assembled a wine and spirits list that includes many selections from Greece and Turkey. In addition, Ms. Racine manages a roving cart of sweet and digestif libations from Greece and Turkey that are served with typical sweets. There are outdoor tables as well as 68 seats indoors at 50 percent capacity. (Opens Wednesday)  1740 Broadway (55th Street), 212-970-1740.  Opening  La Pizza & La Pasta A Colori  This restaurant, in Eataly's financial district location, has joined forces with Color Factory, an interactive art gallery in Hudson Square, to create a menu, décor and installations that emphasize color. Cheese of varying golden hues presented on an artist's palette, squid ink risotto, and pizza dressed in the green of spring peas give you some idea. They're having fun. Special events and work with EnChroma, a company that produces special lenses for people with color blindness, are also part of the project. (Wednesday)  Eataly NYC Downtown, 4 World Trade Center, 101 Liberty Street (Church Street), 212-897-2895, eataly.com.  Seeyamañana  The inspirations for this rustic, mostly vegan spot is beachy Baja California. Dishes include a vegan tostada with brussels sprouts, beet tacos, root vegetable ceviche and a birria quesadilla. Food is available à la carte, or by advance reservations for a $89 prepaid three-course menu that includes three cocktails and gratuity.  49 West 27th Street, 212-689-4000, seeyamanananyc.com.  Loreto Kitchen and Bar  The food at this inviting spot touches on several regions of Italy with Neapolitan-style pizza, cacio e pepe and fritto misto. The chef, Pietro Aletto, worked with Jonathan Benno and Andrew Carmellini. The restaurant is done in soft green and amber leather with natural, rustic elements.  280 Ashland Place (Lafayette Avenue), Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-554-1121, loretonyc.com.  Covacha  What was Café Frida is now a new restaurant featuring the food of the province of Jalisco, home of tequila. It has the same owner as Café Frida, Cristina Castañeda, who closed that restaurant because of the pandemic. She had not expected to reopen until she made a deal with her landlord, but instead decided it was time for a change. ''It was time to introduce New Yorkers to some new flavors,'' she said. The menu offers some uncommon guacamoles made with ingredients like blackened chiles, raw tuna, and cheese; covachas, soupy preparations to scoop with tortillas; and more substantial choices, like softly barbecued beef shank; fish in a crunchy masa patty; and a charred pork bun. There's a mocktail version of each cocktail.  368 Columbus Avenue (79th Street), 212-712-2929.  BG on Fifth  The outdoor cafe version of Bergdorf Goodman's seventh-floor restaurant has reopened with a more decidedly Parisian look with graceful bergère chairs and pergolas for shade. Menu additions include a passion fruit margarita and a truffled chicken BLT. It's open from noon to 6 p.m. daily, except Sundays when it closes at 5 p.m. No reservations.  754 Fifth Avenue (58th Street).  Coby Club  The entrepreneur Bob Pontarelli will open this plush, intimate lounge, beneath his Elmo restaurant in Chelsea, with small plates to accompany cocktails like a burnt orange old-fashioned. For now, it's at 50 percent capacity with 48 seats. (Thursday)  156½ Seventh Avenue (20th Street), 917-972-8081, cobyclubnyc.com.  Pastavino  With the closing of Esca in Manhattan, you now have to head to the Staten Island waterfront for David Pasternack's food. His restaurant, in partnership with Victor Rallo, has reopened serving his concepts as executed by Josh Laurano, the executive chef. There's a new waterfront garden for dining with a view.  44 Navy Pier Court (Front Street), Stapleton Heights, Staten Island, 718-556-9300, pastavinosi.com.  Alimentari Flâneur  Daniel Emilio Soares, a fourth-generation member of the Balducci family of food retailers, has run a nomadic produce market since summer 2019, finding niche locations for his highly specialized merchandise. Now, he has a more permanent home with a five-year lease in the sprawling Market Line complex on the Lower East Side for rarities like rhubarb harvested by candlelight, pink lemons and prepared items from restaurants like Wildair. He also plans pop-ups this summer in Brooklyn and Manhattan.  The Market Line, 115 Delancey Street (Essex Street), 347-569-8701.  Chefs on the Move  Matthew Kenney  This vegan chef and restaurateur was named chief culinary officer of PlantX, a Canadian company that produces plant-based products.  A Taste of C-CAP  The nonprofit organization that trains high school students for culinary careers will honor Carla Hall at its virtual benefit and have a roster of chefs, including Mary Sue Milliken, Susan Feniger, Diana Dávila, Aarón Sánchez and Jerome Grant, demonstrating recipes.  April 29, 7:45 to 9 p.m., tickets from $250, bit.ly/tasteofccap.  Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram , Facebook , YouTube and Pinterest . Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice .  More restaurant news is onlineat nytimes.com/food.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003j "
400		"    Church Coalition Urges Home Depot Boycott Over Voting Law  By Nick Corasaniti  724 words 21 April 2021   6     Black religious leaders representing more than 1,000 churches in the state issued a ''warning shot'' for other Republican-led states that are trying to limit voting access.  A major coalition of Black faith leaders in Georgia, representing more than 1,000 churches in the state, called on Tuesday for a boycott of Home Depot, arguing that the company had abdicated its responsibility as a good corporate citizen by not pushing back on the state's new voting law.  The call for a boycott, led by Bishop Reginald T. Jackson, who oversees all 534 African Methodist Episcopal churches in Georgia, represents one of the first major steps to put significant economic pressure on businesses to be more vocal in opposing Republican efforts in Georgia and around the country to enact new restrictions on voting.  ''We don't believe this is simply a political matter,'' Bishop Jackson said in an interview. ''This is a matter that deals with securing the future of this democracy, and the greatest right in this democracy is the right to vote.''  Home Depot, Mr. Jackson said, ''demonstrated an indifference, a lack of response to the call, not only from clergy, but a call from other groups to speak out in opposition to this legislation.''  While boycotts can be challenging to carry out in ways that put meaningful financial pressure on large corporations, the call nonetheless represents a new phase in the battle over voting rights in Georgia, where many Democrats and civil rights groups have been reluctant to support boycotts, viewing them as risking unfair collateral damage for the companies' workers.  But the coalition of faith leaders pointed to the use of boycotts in the civil rights movement, when Black voters' rights were also threatened, and said their call to action was meant as a ''warning shot'' for other state legislatures.  ''This is not just a Georgia issue; we're talking about democracy in America that is under threat,'' said the Rev. Timothy McDonald III, the pastor of the First Iconium Baptist Church in Atlanta. ''We've got to use whatever leverage and power, spiritual fortitude that we have, including our dollars, to help people to understand that this is a national campaign.''  Home Depot's headquarters are in Georgia, and it is one of the largest employers in the state. But while other major Georgia corporations like Coca-Cola and Delta have spoken out against the state's new voting law, Home Depot has not, offering only a statement this month that ''the most appropriate approach for us to take is to continue to underscore our belief that all elections should be accessible, fair and secure.''  While not publicly wading into the fray, one of the company's founders, Arthur Blank, said in a call with other business executives this month that he supported voting rights. Another founder, Ken Langone, is a vocal supporter of former President Donald J. Trump.  Mr. Jackson said that the faith leaders were calling for four specific actions from Home Depot: speaking out against the Georgia voting law, publicly opposing similar bills in other states, offering support for the John Lewis Voting Rights Act in Congress, and backing litigation against the Georgia law.  Not all voting rights groups are on board with a boycott.  ''I can't fully support a boycott within Georgia,'' said Aunna Dennis, the executive director of the Georgia chapter of Common Cause. ''The boycott hurts the working-class person. But corporations do need to be held accountable on where they put their dollars.''  Faith leaders acknowledged concerns from state leaders, both Democratic and Republican, about the impact of boycotts, but felt the stakes were high enough.  ''It is unfortunate for those who will be impacted by this, but how many more million will be impacted if they don't have the right to vote?'' said Jamal H. Bryant, the senior pastor of the New Birth Missionary Baptist Church in Lithonia, Ga.  ''And so in weighing it out, we understand, tongue in cheek, that this is a necessary evil,'' Dr. Bryant said. ''But it has to happen in order for the good to happen.''  Bishop Reginald T. Jackson leads boycott calls of Home Depot in Georgia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT ODOM FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l00049 "
401		"    Richard Rush, 91, Director Of 'Stunt Man,' a Cult Thriller  By Neil Genzlinger  1,040 words 21 April 2021   11     He was nominated for an Oscar for the movie, about filmmaking stunts, perception and reality. His earlier films were aimed at the teenage market.  Richard Rush, who made rebellious-youth films in the 1960s that featured emerging stars like Jack Nicholson but who had his biggest success in 1980 with ''The Stunt Man,'' a quirky, expectation-defying thriller that gained cult status, died on April 8 at his home in Los Angeles. He was 91.  His wife, Claude Rush, said the cause was an accumulation of health issues that included heart and kidney failure. He had a heart transplant 18 years ago.  Mr. Rush didn't make a lot of movies; the last of his dozen feature films, the erotic thriller ''Color of Night,'' was released in 1994. But he made his mark with the actors he cast and with a certain fearlessness in his filmmaking choices.  In ''The Stunt Man,'' Steve Railsback plays a fugitive who accidentally finds himself on a film set and ends up as a stunt man while striking up a romance with one of the stars (played by Barbara Hershey). Mr. Rush was nominated for an Oscar for directing and for the script, which he and Lawrence B. Marcus adapted from a Paul Brodeur novel. Peter O'Toole received an Oscar nomination for his bravura performance as the director who may or may not be trying to kill his new stunt man.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  The movie is full of wild stunts and misdirection, keeping the audience guessing about what is real and what is movie-within-the-movie magic.  ''We couldn't wait to get to the set every day because we knew something exciting and creative was going to happen,'' Mr. Railsback said in a phone interview.  Mr. Rush, in a 2017 interview with the blog We Are Cult, described what he was going for in the movie.  ''I had the audacity to think that I could make a picture that would explore illusion and reality,'' he said, ''and I wanted to use the film as a mirror for the paranoid mind-set that we all live through at one point or another.''  If ''The Stunt Man'' and some of his other films were hard to classify, switching quickly from comedy to drama to romance, that was because reality was like that, he said.  ''Living life is like falling down through a pinball machine, with balls bouncing off of each other, causing action and reaction in an unexpected way,'' he told We Are Cult. ''And that's how I view storytelling: having that great balance of all the various elements. Something is allowed to be funny and serious sometimes within the same moment or scene.''  Richard Walter Rush was born on April 15, 1929, in New York. His widow said that his parents were Ray and Nina Rush, Russian immigrants, and that his father had owned bookstores in New York and Los Angeles, where the family settled when Richard was a boy.  During the Korean War Mr. Rush was part of a filmmaking unit in the Air Force, stationed in San Bernardino, Calif. After his military service he enrolled in a new film school at the University of California, Los Angeles.  His early films were generally low-budget affairs made quickly and aimed at the teenage market.  One of Mr. Nicholson's earliest roles was in Mr. Rush's first film, ''Too Soon to Love'' (1960), a drama about a teenage couple dealing with a pregnancy, a somewhat scandalous subject for the time. Mr. Nicholson was back in Mr. Rush's biker picture, ''Hell's Angels on Wheels,'' in 1967, two years before the better-known ''Easy Rider'' worked a biker theme with a cast that featured Mr. Nicholson, Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper (who directed that film).  In 1974 Mr. Rush directed the action comedy ''Freebie and the Bean,'' with James Caan and Alan Arkin starring in an early example of the modern-day buddy-cop genre soon to spawn hits like ''48 Hrs'' and ''Lethal Weapon.''  On ''Hell's Angels on Wheels'' and several other movies, he worked with the cinematographer Laszlo Kovacs, who went on to a long and acclaimed career with credits like ''Easy Rider'' and ''Five Easy Pieces'' (1970).  Among Mr. Rush's other movies were ''Psych-Out'' (1968), about a deaf runaway (Susan Strasberg) in the hippie heart of San Francisco, where Mr. Nicholson and Bruce Dern are among the populace; and ''Getting Straight'' (1970), with Elliott Gould and Candice Bergen, a film that Vincent Canby of The new_york_times dismissed as ''the worst of the campus-revolution movies.''  ''Color of Night,'' which starred Jane March and Bruce Willis, drew considerable attention both for its racy sex scenes and the dispute Mr. Rush got into with the studio over the editing. During arbitration with the studio, Cinergi Productions, Mr. Rush had a heart attack.  He also had an unpleasant experience with ''Air America,'' an action comedy for which he wrote a script that became part of a long development tussle. When the movie finally came out in 1990, it was directed by Roger Spottiswoode; Mr. Rush shared a screenwriting credit.  He married Claude Cuvereaux in 1995 after many years together. He is also survived by a son, Anthony, and a grandson.  Mr. Rush had definite ideas about the scripts he agreed to direct and how to shoot them. Mr. Railsback recalled that on ''The Stunt Man,'' the cinematographer, Mario Tosi, was taken aback by Mr. Rush's hands-on style.  ''Early on Richard would say, 'Put your camera here, do this and do this,''' he said, ''and Mario was getting upset because Richard was telling him where to put the camera and all this other stuff.''  But when the day's footage (known as dailies) came back, Mr. Railsback said, Mr. Rush's instincts proved to be spot on.  ''Mario looked at the dailies,'' he said, ''and he walked over to Richard and said, 'You just tell me where to put that camera.'''  Richard Rush, left, directing Steve Railsback and Peter O'Toole. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TWENTIETH CENTURY FOX, VIA FEST)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003b "
402		"    Streaming Rivals Gain on Netflix  By Edmund Lee  970 words 21 April 2021   5     The streaming service reported the addition of four million new customers for the first quarter, below the six million it had forecast.  Netflix still rules the streaming universe. As of the end of March, it had 207.6 million total paying subscribers, with about 67 million in the United States, the company noted in an earnings report on Tuesday.  But its main competitors -- Disney+, HBO Max, Paramount+ and AppleTV+, as well as the old-guard streamers Amazon Prime Video and Hulu -- have cut into Netflix's share of viewers' attention.  The global demand for original Netflix programs, like ''Bridgerton,'' the much buzzed-about romance series from the super-producer Shonda Rhimes, has started to drop relative to similar offerings from newcomers, according to the data firm Parrot Analytics, which has developed a metric to rate not only the number of viewers for given shows, but their likelihood of attracting subscribers to a streaming service.  In its latest rankings, Parrot reported that Netflix's share of total demand -- a measure of the popularity of its shows -- was slightly above 50 percent for the first three months of the year, compared with 54 percent a year ago and 65 percent in the first quarter of 2019.  In other words, competitors have started eating into Netflix's dominance.  That showed up in the numbers. For the first quarter of 2021, Netflix reported the addition of four million new customers, below the six million it had forecast. The company expects to add only one million new customers for this current quarter ending in June.  Netflix shares plummeted about 10 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday, after the earnings announcement.  The company doesn't think the newer competitors were the issue.  ''Are we sure it's not competition? Because obviously there's a lot of new competition,'' Reed Hastings, the company's co-chief executive along with Ted Sarandos, said on the earnings call after the report. ''It's intensely competitive, but it always has been. We've been competing with Amazon Prime for 13 years, with Hulu for 14 years.'' He added: ''So there's no real change that we can detect in the competitive environment.''  Netflix pulled back on productions during the pandemic, which has now rippled into its release schedule. The company didn't have any big returning series in the period.  ''We'll get back to much steadier state in the back half of the year,'' Mr. Sarandos said, citing the return of popular series like ''The Witcher'' and ''You.''  Netflix also raised prices in October, increasing its standard plan by a dollar to $14 a month. It added an extra $2 to its premium tier, which now costs $18. The company typically increases its fees about every 18 months. It is also trying to clamp down on password sharing, long a common practice.  Last year, in the same period, just as the pandemic was underway, the company added a record 15.7 million subscribers.  As much of the world went into lockdown, people turned to screens to while away the hours. Netflix recorded a jump in new sign-ups, leading to a record year of nearly 37 million additional customers. The company is unlikely to repeat that performance for 2021 as restaurants, stores, theaters and sports stadiums start opening up to full capacity across the country.  But Netflix is an international business. The majority of its revenues now come from overseas, and it has banked its future growth on emerging markets such as India and Latin America. Those regions have had recent surges in coronavirus cases, prompting new lockdowns. Most of the world, including Europe, has not vaccinated its citizens as quickly as the United States.  Netflix is still spending big. It spent $465 million to buy two sequels to the hit whodunit ''Knives Out,'' a price tag 50 percent higher than the first film's gross receipts. It's also 10 times what the film cost to produce. Hollywood lit up with chatter. Did Netflix overpay?  The film's director, Rian Johnson, came up with the idea for the film, and he and his producing partner control the rights. The lucrative deal is in keeping with Netflix's expensive courtship of Hollywood creators. It has nine-figure agreements with prolific television producers including Ms. Rhimes and Ryan Murphy, as well as the actor-producer Adam Sandler. Mr. Johnson could join their ranks by creating additional series and films for the company.  Despite Netflix's push into owning its own content, it recently entered into a distribution agreement with Sony Pictures Entertainment, the last major Hollywood studio not tied to any streaming business. Netflix will have rights to some Marvel franchises, including the Sony-controlled ''Spider-Man,'' and several offshoots based on the character.  The company reported profit of $1.7 billion on revenue of $7.16 billion for the first quarter. Investors were looking to $1.3 billion in profit on $7.1 billion in sales.  In addition, the board of directors approved a $5 billion stock buyback plan, which should lower the number of available shares in circulation, potentially making them more valuable.  Although competitors are gaining ground, Netflix is in its best financial shape of its history. It hit a milestone at the end of last year, when it said it would no longer look to borrow money to fund its content slate. Another way to look at it: Netflix finally became a truly profitable business after topping 200 million subscribers, each paying an average of $11 a month.  In other words: Its competitors are still losing lots of money on streaming.  Golda Rosheuvel as Queen Charlotte in the Netflix hit ''Bridgerton.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY Liam Daniel/Netflix FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4l0003i  Search Summary  "
403		"   SYRIA DISPATCH  War Exiles Find Shelter in the Eighth Century  By Ben Hubbard and Ivor Prickett  1,394 words 20 April 2021   1     AL-KFEIR, Syria -- As the sun set, children in dirty clothes and battered shoes herded sheep past the towering stone walls of a Byzantine settlement abandoned more than 1,000 years ago, leading them into an ancient cave nearby where the animals would spend the night.  Laundry hung near the semi-cylindrical wall of a ruined, centuries-old church. Vegetables grew between the remnants of two rectangular doorways ornamented with carved leaf patterns. Scattered about were giant cut stones from what had once been an extensive town.  It was here, at the vast archaeological site of al-Kfeir, Syria, where Abu Ramadan and his family sought shelter more than a year ago after fleeing a Syrian government assault.  They've been here ever since.  Abu Ramadan, 38, said he cared little for the site's history as a trading and agricultural center, but appreciated the sturdy walls that blunted the wind and the abundance of cut stones that a family who had lost everything could salvage to piece together a new life.  ''We built these from the ruins,'' he said, pointing to a chicken coop and wood-burning stove. ''We, too, have become ruins.''  As Syria's 10-year civil war has displaced millions of people, families like Abu Ramadan's have sought refuge from a modern war behind the walls of dozens of ancient villages sprinkled across the hills of the country's northwest, a region still out of the control of President Bashar al-Assad's government.  Since their original owners left them between the eighth and 10th centuries, these ruins have remained in remarkably good condition for more than 1,000 years, their stone structures largely withstanding the passing of empires and battering by the wind and rain.  But Syria's current conflict has posed new threats to these sites with their columnated churches, multistory homes and elegant bathhouses. Their facades are now marred by bullets, their pillars shattered by airstrikes and their limestone walls sought out for protection by soldiers, rebels and jihadists battling for the country's future.  Millenniums of human habitation have left Syria strewn with historical sites that date to Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman eras. UNESCO, the United Nations cultural agency, has designated six World Heritage sites in Syria, including, in 2011, the ruins in the northwest, called the Ancient Villages of Northern Syria.  The use of these sites as informal refugee camps, archaeologists fear, presents a formidable threat to their future as the families add new walls, drive in tent posts and cart off stones.  ''The walls protect us from the wind, the cold and everything else,'' said Abdulaziz Hassan, 45, whose family lives in a tent inside the remains of the 1,800-year-old Temple of Zeus Bomos near the village of Babuta.  Mr. Hassan, a gardener before the war, had moved repeatedly with his family to flee government advances into rebel territory, finally settling in the ruins because they didn't have to pay rent as those who pitched tents on private land did.  ''Where else can we go?'' he said. ''Everywhere you go, you have to pay.''  The remains of three temple walls towered over his tent, and the surrounding hillside was marked by toppled pillars and giant stones bearing carvings and Greek inscriptions.  The war damaged historic sites elsewhere in Syria, too.  Crac de Chevaliers, one of the world's best preserved Crusader castles, was littered with rubble when the government seized it from rebels in 2014.  And after the jihadists of the Islamic State took control of the majestic, 2,000-year-old ruins of the city of Palmyra, they held executions in its Roman theater.  The historical sites in Syria's northwest, near the border with Turkey, received less attention before the war. They were so numerous, and so undeveloped as tourist sites, the area felt like an open-air museum.  Visitors could scamper about the remains of pagan temples and early Christian churches, descend into underground storerooms hewn from rocky hillsides, and admire intricate designs around windows and carved crosses over doorways.  The Syrian government branded them ''the Forgotten Cities'' to attract visitors.  Built between the first and seventh centuries, they provided ''a remarkable testimony to rural life'' during the transition from the pagan Roman Empire to the Christian Byzantines, UNESCO said.  The ancient towns were abandoned over subsequent centuries because of changes in climate, and shifting trade routes and political control -- but not because of war, a primary reason they were so well preserved, said Amr Al-Azm, a former Syrian antiquities official and now a professor of Middle East history at Shawnee State University in Portsmouth, Ohio.  Efforts to protect the sites froze when Syria's war broke out in 2011, and armed groups began using them as bases.  In 2016, airstrikes damaged the Church of St. Simeon, shattering the remains of the pillars on top of which its hermit namesake is said to have lived for nearly 40 years before his death in 459.  Pressure on the sites increased further last year, when a government offensive pushed nearly a million people into the rebel-controlled northwest. About 2.7 million of the 4.2 million people now living in the region have been displaced from elsewhere in Syria.  The rebel-held area is small and crowded, and people are confined, with a wall along the Turkish border to the north to keep them from fleeing and hostile government forces to the south. As the new arrivals scrambled to find shelter in destroyed buildings, olive groves and sprawling tent camps, some settled in the ancient sites.  Families with livestock liked the sites because they had more space than the crowded refugee camps. Many used the sturdy, precut stones to build animal pens or reinforce their tents.  Some sites have underground caves, where families store belongings and hide from airstrikes when they hear fighter jets overhead.  Ayman Nabo, an antiquities official with the local administration in Idlib Province, said shelling and airstrikes had damaged many historical sites while poverty and the chaos of war had encouraged illegal excavations by treasure hunters.  But the greatest threat to the sites' survival, he said, was people making off with stones or breaking them apart to build new structures.  ''If this continues, a whole archaeological site could disappear,'' he said.  The local administration lacked the resources to protect the sites, but Mr. Nabo said he hoped they survived, both for future generations and for the people now trapped in what he called ''a big prison,'' with government forces controlling roads to the Mediterranean coast and the rest of Syria.  ''We no longer have a sea,'' he said. ''We no longer have a river. We no longer have a forest for children to visit.'' So people need the sites as ''places to breathe.''  For now, they are homes of last resort for battered families.  ''Whenever it rains, we get wet,'' said Sihan Jassem, 26, whose family had moved three times since fleeing their home and ending up in an improvised tent of blankets and tarps amid the ruins of Deir Amman, a Byzantine village.  ''The children play on the ruins and we worry that the rocks will fall on them,'' she said.  Her sister, widowed by the war, lived in a nearby tent with five children.  The sun reflected off wet wildflowers, and sheep wandered among the scattered stones, grazing near an ancient wall where a modern romantic had written in spray paint, ''Your love is like a medicine.''  But Ms. Jassem found no romance in her surroundings.  ''We wish we had stayed in our homes,'' she said, ''and never seen these ruins.''  Syrian families displaced in the civil war have found refuge at al-Kfeir, a trading and agricultural center in the country's northwest abandoned over 1,000 years ago. Top, children playing in the ruins. Above right, a satellite dish and solar panels erected by the new inhabitants. Above left, a shepherd with his flock. Archaeologists fear the use of such sites as informal refugee camps will destroy them.; A boy amid the ruins of al-Kfeir. Exiles appreciate the abundance of stone and the absence of rent at the state sites. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY IVOR PRICKETT FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4k0000h "
404		"    Explaining The Science  By Julia Rosen  6,821 words 20 April 2021   2     The science of climate change is more solid and widely agreed upon than you might think. But the scope of the topic, as well as rampant disinformation, can make it hard to separate fact from fiction. Here, we've done our best to present you with not only the most accurate scientific information, but also an explanation of how we know it.  How do we know climate change is really happening?  Climate change is often cast as a prediction made by complicated computer models. But the scientific basis for climate change is much broader, and models are actually only one part of it (and, for what it's worth, they're surprisingly accurate).  For more than a century, scientists have understood the basic physics behind why greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide cause warming. These gases make up just a small fraction of the atmosphere but exert outsized control on Earth's climate by trapping some of the planet's heat before it escapes into space. This greenhouse effect is important: It's why a planet so far from the sun has liquid water and life!  However, during the Industrial Revolution, people started burning coal and other fossil fuels to power factories, smelters and steam engines, which added more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. Ever since, human activities have been heating the planet.  We know this is true thanks to an overwhelming body of evidence that begins with temperature measurements taken at weather stations and on ships starting in the mid-1800s. Later, scientists began tracking surface temperatures with satellites and looking for clues about climate change in geologic records. Together, these data all tell the same story: Earth is getting hotter.  Average global temperatures have increased by 2.2 degrees Fahrenheit, or 1.2 degrees Celsius, since 1880, with the greatest changes happening in the late 20th century. Land areas have warmed more than the sea surface and the Arctic has warmed the most -- by more than 4 degrees Fahrenheit just since the 1960s. Temperature extremes have also shifted. In the United States, daily record highs now outnumber record lows two-to-one.  This warming is unprecedented in recent geologic history. A famous illustration, first published in 1998 and often called the hockey-stick graph, shows how temperatures remained fairly flat for centuries (the shaft of the stick) before turning sharply upward (the blade). It's based on data from tree rings, ice cores and other natural indicators. And the basic picture, which has withstood decades of scrutiny from climate scientists and contrarians alike, shows that Earth is hotter today than it's been in at least 1,000 years, and probably much longer.  In fact, surface temperatures actually mask the true scale of climate change, because the ocean has absorbed 90 percent of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases. Measurements collected over the last six decades by oceanographic expeditions and networks of floating instruments show that every layer of the ocean is warming up. According to one study, the ocean has absorbed as much heat between 1997 and 2015 as it did in the previous 130 years.  We also know that climate change is happening because we see the effects everywhere. Ice sheets and glaciers are shrinking while sea levels are rising. Arctic sea ice is disappearing. In the spring, snow melts sooner and plants flower earlier. Animals are moving to higher elevations and latitudes to find cooler conditions. And droughts, floods and wildfires have all gotten more extreme. Models predicted many of these changes, but observations show they are now coming to pass.  Back to top.  How much agreement is there among scientists about climate change?  There's no denying that scientists love a good, old-fashioned argument. But when it comes to climate change, there is virtually no debate: Numerous studies have found that more than 90 percent of scientists who study Earth's climate agree that the planet is warming and that humans are the primary cause. Most major scientific bodies, from NASA to the World Meteorological Organization, endorse this view. That's an astounding level of consensus given the contrarian, competitive nature of the scientific enterprise, where questions like what killed the dinosaurs remain bitterly contested.  Scientific agreement about climate change started to emerge in the late 1980s, when the influence of human-caused warming began to rise above natural climate variability. By 1991, two-thirds of earth and atmospheric scientists surveyed for an early consensus study said that they accepted the idea of anthropogenic global warming. And by 1995, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a famously conservative body that periodically takes stock of the state of scientific knowledge, concluded that ''the balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate.'' Currently, more than 97 percent of publishing climate scientists agree on the existence and cause of climate change (as does nearly 60 percent of the general population of the United States).  So where did we get the idea that there's still debate about climate change? A lot of it came from coordinated messaging campaigns by companies and politicians that opposed climate action. Many pushed the narrative that scientists still hadn't made up their minds about climate change, even though that was misleading. Frank Luntz, a Republican consultant, explained the rationale in an infamous 2002 memo to conservative lawmakers: ''Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly,'' he wrote. Questioning consensus remains a common talking point today, and the 97 percent figure has become something of a lightning rod.  To bolster the falsehood of lingering scientific doubt, some people have pointed to things like the Global Warming Petition Project, which urged the United States government to reject the Kyoto Protocol of 1997, an early international climate agreement. The petition proclaimed that climate change wasn't happening, and even if it were, it wouldn't be bad for humanity. Since 1998, more than 30,000 people with science degrees have signed it. However, nearly 90 percent of them studied something other than Earth, atmospheric or environmental science, and the signatories included just 39 climatologists. Most were engineers, doctors, and others whose training had little to do with the physics of the climate system.  A few well-known researchers remain opposed to the scientific consensus. Some, like Willie Soon, a researcher affiliated with the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, have ties to the fossil fuel industry. Others do not, but their assertions have not held up under the weight of evidence. At least one prominent skeptic, the physicist Richard Muller, changed his mind after reassessing historical temperature data as part of the Berkeley Earth project. His team's findings essentially confirmed the results he had set out to investigate, and he came away firmly convinced that human activities were warming the planet. ''Call me a converted skeptic,'' he wrote in an Op-Ed for the Times in 2012.  Mr. Luntz, the Republican pollster, has also reversed his position on climate change and now advises politicians on how to motivate climate action.  A final note on uncertainty: Denialists often use it as evidence that climate science isn't settled. However, in science, uncertainty doesn't imply a lack of knowledge. Rather, it's a measure of how well something is known. In the case of climate change, scientists have found a range of possible future changes in temperature, precipitation and other important variables -- which will depend largely on how quickly we reduce emissions. But uncertainty does not undermine their confidence that climate change is real and that people are causing it.  Back to top.  Do we really only have 150 years of climate data? How is that enough to tell us about centuries of change?  Earth's climate is inherently variable. Some years are hot and others are cold, some decades bring more hurricanes than others, some ancient droughts spanned the better part of centuries. Glacial cycles operate over many millenniums. So how can scientists look at data collected over a relatively short period of time and conclude that humans are warming the planet? The answer is that the instrumental temperature data that we have tells us a lot, but it's not all we have to go on.  Historical records stretch back to the 1880s (and often before), when people began to regularly measure temperatures at weather stations and on ships as they traversed the world's oceans. These data show a clear warming trend during the 20th century.  Some have questioned whether these records could be skewed, for instance, by the fact that a disproportionate number of weather stations are near cities, which tend to be hotter than surrounding areas as a result of the so-called urban heat island effect. However, researchers regularly correct for these potential biases when reconstructing global temperatures. In addition, warming is corroborated by independent data like satellite observations, which cover the whole planet, and other ways of measuring temperature changes.  Much has also been made of the small dips and pauses that punctuate the rising temperature trend of the last 150 years. But these are just the result of natural climate variability or other human activities that temporarily counteract greenhouse warming. For instance, in the mid-1900s, internal climate dynamics and light-blocking pollution from coal-fired power plants halted global warming for a few decades. (Eventually, rising greenhouse gases and pollution-control laws caused the planet to start heating up again.) Likewise, the so-called warming hiatus of the 2000s was partly a result of natural climate variability that allowed more heat to enter the ocean rather than warm the atmosphere. The years since have been the hottest on record.  Still, could the entire 20th century just be one big natural climate wiggle? To address that question, we can look at other kinds of data that give a longer perspective. Researchers have used geologic records like tree rings, ice cores, corals and sediments that preserve information about prehistoric climates to extend the climate record. The resulting picture of global temperature change is basically flat for centuries, then turns sharply upward over the last 150 years. It has been a target of climate denialists for decades. However, study after study has confirmed the results, which show that the planet hasn't been this hot in at least 1,000 years, and probably longer.  Back to top.  How do we know climate change is caused by humans?  Scientists have studied past climate changes to understand the factors that can cause the planet to warm or cool. The big ones are changes in solar energy, ocean circulation, volcanic activity and the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. And they have each played a role at times.  For example, 300 years ago, a combination of reduced solar output and increased volcanic activity cooled parts of the planet enough that Londoners regularly ice skated on the Thames. About 12,000 years ago, major changes in Atlantic circulation plunged the Northern Hemisphere into a frigid state. And 56 million years ago, a giant burst of greenhouse gases, from volcanic activity or vast deposits of methane (or both), abruptly warmed the planet by at least 9 degrees Fahrenheit, scrambling the climate, choking the oceans and triggering mass extinctions.  In trying to determine the cause of current climate changes, scientists have looked at all of these factors. The first three have varied a bit over the last few centuries and they have quite likely had modest effects on climate, particularly before 1950. But they cannot account for the planet's rapidly rising temperature, especially in the second half of the 20th century, when solar output actually declined and volcanic eruptions exerted a cooling effect.  That warming is best explained by rising greenhouse gas concentrations. Greenhouse gases have a powerful effect on climate (see the next question for why). And since the Industrial Revolution, humans have been adding more of them to the atmosphere, primarily by extracting and burning fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas, which releases carbon dioxide.  Bubbles of ancient air trapped in ice show that, before about 1750, the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was roughly 280 parts per million. It began to rise slowly and crossed the 300 p.p.m. threshold around 1900. CO2 levels then accelerated as cars and electricity became big parts of modern life, recently topping 420 p.p.m. The concentration of methane, the second most important greenhouse gas, has more than doubled. We're now emitting carbon much faster than it was released 56 million years ago.  These rapid increases in greenhouse gases have caused the climate to warm abruptly. In fact, climate models suggest that greenhouse warming can explain virtually all of the temperature change since 1950. According to the most recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which assesses published scientific literature, natural drivers and internal climate variability can only explain a small fraction of late-20th century warming.  Another study put it this way: The odds of current warming occurring without anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions are less than 1 in 100,000.  But greenhouse gases aren't the only climate-altering compounds people put into the air. Burning fossil fuels also produces particulate pollution that reflects sunlight and cools the planet. Scientists estimate that this pollution has masked up to half of the greenhouse warming we would have otherwise experienced.  Back to top.  Since greenhouse gases occur naturally, how do we know they're causing Earth's temperature to rise?  Greenhouse gases like water vapor and carbon dioxide serve an important role in the climate. Without them, Earth would be far too cold to maintain liquid water and humans would not exist!  Here's how it works: the planet's temperature is basically a function of the energy the Earth absorbs from the sun (which heats it up) and the energy Earth emits to space as infrared radiation (which cools it down). Because of their molecular structure, greenhouse gases temporarily absorb some of that outgoing infrared radiation and then re-emit it in all directions, sending some of that energy back toward the surface and heating the planet. Scientists have understood this process since the 1850s.  Greenhouse gas concentrations have varied naturally in the past. Over millions of years, atmospheric CO2 levels have changed depending on how much of the gas volcanoes belched into the air and how much got removed through geologic processes. On time scales of hundreds to thousands of years, concentrations have changed as carbon has cycled between the ocean, soil and air.  Today, however, we are the ones causing CO2 levels to increase at an unprecedented pace by taking ancient carbon from geologic deposits of fossil fuels and putting it into the atmosphere when we burn them. Since 1750, carbon dioxide concentrations have increased by almost 50 percent. Methane and nitrous oxide, other important anthropogenic greenhouse gases that are released mainly by agricultural activities, have also spiked over the last 250 years.  We know based on the physics described above that this should cause the climate to warm. We also see certain telltale ''fingerprints'' of greenhouse warming. For example, nights are warming even faster than days because greenhouse gases don't go away when the sun sets. And upper layers of the atmosphere have actually cooled, because more energy is being trapped by greenhouse gases in the lower atmosphere.  We also know that we are the cause of rising greenhouse gas concentrations -- and not just because we can measure the CO2 coming out of tailpipes and smokestacks. We can see it in the chemical signature of the carbon in CO2.  Carbon comes in three different masses: 12, 13 and 14. Things made of organic matter (including fossil fuels) tend to have relatively less carbon-13. Volcanoes tend to produce CO2 with relatively more carbon-13. And over the last century, the carbon in atmospheric CO2 has gotten lighter, pointing to an organic source.  We can tell it's old organic matter by looking for carbon-14, which is radioactive and decays over time. Fossil fuels are too ancient to have any carbon-14 left in them, so if they were behind rising CO2 levels, you would expect the amount of carbon-14 in the atmosphere to drop, which is exactly what the data show.  It's important to note that water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. However, it does not cause warming; instead it responds to it. That's because warmer air holds more moisture, which creates a snowball effect in which human-caused warming allows the atmosphere to hold more water vapor and further amplifies climate change. This so-called feedback cycle has doubled the warming caused by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.  Back to top.  Why should we be worried that the planet has warmed 2°F since the 1800s?  A common source of confusion when it comes to climate change is the difference between weather and climate. Weather is the constantly changing set of meteorological conditions that we experience when we step outside, whereas climate is the long-term average of those conditions, usually calculated over a 30-year period. Or, as some say: Weather is your mood and climate is your personality.  So while 2 degrees Fahrenheit doesn't represent a big change in the weather, it's a huge change in climate. As we've already seen, it's enough to melt ice and raise sea levels, to shift rainfall patterns around the world and to reorganize ecosystems, sending animals scurrying toward cooler habitats and killing trees by the millions.  It's also important to remember that two degrees represents the global average, and many parts of the world have already warmed by more than that. For example, land areas have warmed about twice as much as the sea surface. And the Arctic has warmed by about 5 degrees. That's because the loss of snow and ice at high latitudes allows the ground to absorb more energy, causing additional heating on top of greenhouse warming.  Relatively small long-term changes in climate averages also shift extremes in significant ways. For instance, heat waves have always happened, but they have shattered records in recent years. In June of 2020, a town in Siberia registered temperatures of 100 degrees. And in Australia, meteorologists have added a new color to their weather maps to show areas where temperatures exceed 125 degrees. Rising sea levels have also increased the risk of flooding because of storm surges and high tides. These are the foreshocks of climate change.  And we are in for more changes in the future -- up to 9 degrees Fahrenheit of average global warming by the end of the century, in the worst-case scenario. For reference, the difference in global average temperatures between now and the peak of the last ice age, when ice sheets covered large parts of North America and Europe, is about 11 degrees Fahrenheit.  Under the Paris Climate Agreement, which President Biden recently rejoined, countries have agreed to try to limit total warming to between 1.5 and 2 degrees Celsius, or 2.7 and 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, since preindustrial times. And even this narrow range has huge implications. According to scientific studies, the difference between 2.7 and 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit will very likely mean the difference between coral reefs hanging on or going extinct, and between summer sea ice persisting in the Arctic or disappearing completely. It will also determine how many millions of people suffer from water scarcity and crop failures, and how many are driven from their homes by rising seas. In other words, one degree Fahrenheit makes a world of difference.  Back to top.  Is climate change a part of the planet's natural warming and cooling cycles?  Earth's climate has always changed. Hundreds of millions of years ago, the entire planet froze. Fifty million years ago, alligators lived in what we now call the Arctic. And for the last 2.6 million years, the planet has cycled between ice ages when the planet was up to 11 degrees cooler and ice sheets covered much of North America and Europe, and milder interglacial periods like the one we're in now.  Climate denialists often point to these natural climate changes as a way to cast doubt on the idea that humans are causing climate to change today. However, that argument rests on a logical fallacy. It's like ''seeing a murdered body and concluding that people have died of natural causes in the past, so the murder victim must also have died of natural causes,'' a team of social scientists wrote in The Debunking Handbook, which explains the misinformation strategies behind many climate myths.  Indeed, we know that different mechanisms caused the climate to change in the past. Glacial cycles, for example, were triggered by periodic variations in Earth's orbit, which take place over tens of thousands of years and change how solar energy gets distributed around the globe and across the seasons.  These orbital variations don't affect the planet's temperature much on their own. But they set off a cascade of other changes in the climate system; for instance, growing or melting vast Northern Hemisphere ice sheets and altering ocean circulation. These changes, in turn, affect climate by altering the amount of snow and ice, which reflect sunlight, and by changing greenhouse gas concentrations. This is actually part of how we know that greenhouse gases have the ability to significantly affect Earth's temperature.  For at least the last 800,000 years, atmospheric CO2 concentrations oscillated between about 180 parts per million during ice ages and about 280 p.p.m. during warmer periods, as carbon moved between oceans, forests, soils and the atmosphere. These changes occurred in lock step with global temperatures, and are a major reason the entire planet warmed and cooled during glacial cycles, not just the frozen poles.  Today, however, CO2 levels have soared to 420 p.p.m. -- the highest they've been in at least three million years. The concentration of CO2 is also increasing about 100 times faster than it did at the end of the last ice age. This suggests something else is going on, and we know what it is: Since the Industrial Revolution, humans have been burning fossil fuels and releasing greenhouse gases that are heating the planet now (see Question 5 for more details on how we know this, and Questions 4 and 8 for how we know that other natural forces aren't to blame).  Over the next century or two, societies and ecosystems will experience the consequences of this climate change. But our emissions will have even more lasting geologic impacts: According to some studies, greenhouse gas levels may have already warmed the planet enough to delay the onset of the next glacial cycle for at least an additional 50,000 years.  How do we know global warming is not because of the sun or volcanoes?  The sun is the ultimate source of energy in Earth's climate system, so it's a natural candidate for causing climate change. And solar activity has certainly changed over time. We know from satellite measurements and other astronomical observations that the sun's output changes on 11-year cycles. Geologic records and sunspot numbers, which astronomers have tracked for centuries, also show long-term variations in the sun's activity, including some exceptionally quiet periods in the late 1600s and early 1800s.  We know that, from 1900 until the 1950s, solar irradiance increased. And studies suggest that this had a modest effect on early 20th century climate, explaining up to 10 percent of the warming that's occurred since the late 1800s. However, in the second half of the century, when the most warming occurred, solar activity actually declined. This disparity is one of the main reasons we know that the sun is not the driving force behind climate change.  Another reason we know that solar activity hasn't caused recent warming is that, if it had, all the layers of the atmosphere should be heating up. Instead, data show that the upper atmosphere has actually cooled in recent decades -- a hallmark of greenhouse warming.  So how about volcanoes? Eruptions cool the planet by injecting ash and aerosol particles into the atmosphere that reflect sunlight. We've observed this effect in the years following large eruptions. There are also some notable historical examples, like when Iceland's Laki volcano erupted in 1783, causing widespread crop failures in Europe and beyond, and the ''year without a summer,'' which followed the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora in Indonesia.  Since volcanoes mainly act as climate coolers, they can't really explain recent warming. However, scientists say that they may also have contributed slightly to rising temperatures in the early 20th century. That's because there were several large eruptions in the late 1800s that cooled the planet, followed by a few decades with no major volcanic events when warming caught up. During the second half of the 20th century, though, several big eruptions occurred as the planet was heating up fast. If anything, they temporarily masked some amount of human-caused warming.  The second way volcanoes can impact climate is by emitting carbon dioxide. This is important on time scales of millions of years -- it's what keeps the planet habitable (see Question 5 for more on the greenhouse effect). But by comparison to modern anthropogenic emissions, even big eruptions like Krakatoa and Mount St. Helens are just a drop in the bucket. After all, they last only a few hours or days, while we burn fossil fuels 24-7. Studies suggest that, today, volcanoes account for 1 to 2 percent of total CO2 emissions.  Back to top.  How can winters and certain places be getting colder if the planet is warming?  When a big snowstorm hits the United States, climate denialists can try to cite it as proof that climate change isn't happening. In 2015, Senator James Inhofe, an Oklahoma Republican, famously lobbed a snowball in the Senate as he denounced climate science. But these events don't actually disprove climate change.  While there have been some memorable storms in recent years, winters are actually warming across the world. In the United States, average temperatures in December, January and February have increased by about 2.5 degrees this century.  On the flip side, record cold days are becoming less common than record warm days. In the United States, record highs now outnumber record lows two-to-one. And ever-smaller areas of the country experience extremely cold winter temperatures. (The same trends are happening globally.)  So what's with the blizzards? Weather always varies, so it's no surprise that we still have severe winter storms even as average temperatures rise. However, some studies suggest that climate change may be to blame. One possibility is that rapid Arctic warming has affected atmospheric circulation, including the fast-flowing, high-altitude air that usually swirls over the North Pole (a.k.a. the Polar Vortex). Some studies suggest that these changes are bringing more frigid temperatures to lower latitudes and causing weather systems to stall, allowing storms to produce more snowfall. This may explain what we've experienced in the U.S. over the past few decades, as well as a wintertime cooling trend in Siberia, although exactly how the Arctic affects global weather remains a topic of ongoing scientific debate.  Climate change may also explain the apparent paradox behind some of the other places on Earth that haven't warmed much. For instance, a splotch of water in the North Atlantic has cooled in recent years, and scientists say they suspect that may be because ocean circulation is slowing as a result of freshwater streaming off a melting Greenland. If this circulation grinds almost to a halt, as it's done in the geologic past, it would alter weather patterns around the world.  Not all cold weather stems from some counterintuitive consequence of climate change. But it's a good reminder that Earth's climate system is complex and chaotic, so the effects of human-caused changes will play out differently in different places. That's why ''global warming'' is a bit of an oversimplification. Instead, some scientists have suggested that the phenomenon of human-caused climate change would more aptly be called ''global weirding.''  Back to top.  Wildfires and bad weather have always happened. How do we know there's a connection to climate change?  Extreme weather and natural disasters are part of life on Earth -- just ask the dinosaurs. But there is good evidence that climate change has increased the frequency and severity of certain phenomena like heat waves, droughts and floods. Recent research has also allowed scientists to identify the influence of climate change on specific events.  Let's start with heat waves. Studies show that stretches of abnormally high temperatures now happen about five times more often than they would without climate change, and they last longer, too. Climate models project that, by the 2040s, heat waves will be about 12 times more frequent. And that's concerning since extreme heat often causes increased hospitalizations and deaths, particularly among older people and those with underlying health conditions. In the summer of 2003, for example, a heat wave caused an estimated 70,000 excess deaths across Europe. (Human-caused warming amplified the death toll.)  Climate change has also exacerbated droughts, primarily by increasing evaporation. Droughts occur naturally because of random climate variability and factors like whether El Niño or La Niña conditions prevail in the tropical Pacific. But some researchers have found evidence that greenhouse warming has been affecting droughts since even before the Dust Bowl. And it continues to do so today. According to one analysis, the drought that afflicted the American Southwest from 2000 to 2018 was almost 50 percent more severe because of climate change. It was the worst drought the region had experienced in more than 1,000 years.  Rising temperatures have also increased the intensity of heavy precipitation events and the flooding that often follows. For example, studies have found that, because warmer air holds more moisture, Hurricane Harvey, which struck Houston in 2017, dropped between 15 and 40 percent more rainfall than it would have without climate change.  It's still unclear whether climate change is changing the overall frequency of hurricanes, but it is making them stronger. And warming appears to favor certain kinds of weather patterns, like the ''Midwest Water Hose'' events that caused devastating flooding across the Midwest in 2019.  It's important to remember that in most natural disasters, there are multiple factors at play. For instance, the 2019 Midwest floods occurred after a recent cold snap had frozen the ground solid, preventing the soil from absorbing rainwater and increasing runoff into the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers. These waterways have also been reshaped by levees and other forms of river engineering, some of which failed in the floods.  Wildfires are another phenomenon with multiple causes. In many places, fire risk has increased because humans have aggressively fought natural fires and prevented Indigenous peoples from carrying out traditional burning practices. This has allowed fuel to accumulate that makes current fires worse.  However, climate change still plays a major role by heating and drying forests, turning them into tinderboxes. Studies show that warming is the driving factor behind the recent increases in wildfires; one analysis found that climate change is responsible for doubling the area burned across the American West between 1984 and 2015. And researchers say that warming will only make fires bigger and more dangerous in the future.  Back to top.  How bad are the effects of climate change going to be?  It depends on how aggressively we act to address climate change. If we continue with business as usual, by the end of the century, it will be too hot to go outside during heat waves in the Middle East and South Asia. Droughts will grip Central America, the Mediterranean and "
405		"southern Africa. And many island nations and low-lying areas, from Texas to Bangladesh, will be overtaken by rising seas. Conversely, climate change could bring welcome warming and extended growing seasons to the upper Midwest, Canada, the Nordic countries and Russia. Farther north, however, the loss of snow, ice and permafrost will upend the traditions of Indigenous peoples and threaten infrastructure.  It's complicated, but the underlying message is simple: unchecked climate change will likely exacerbate existing inequalities. At a national level, poorer countries will be hit hardest, even though they have historically emitted only a fraction of the greenhouse gases that cause warming. That's because many less developed countries tend to be in tropical regions where additional warming will make the climate increasingly intolerable for humans and crops. These nations also often have greater vulnerabilities, like large coastal populations and people living in improvised housing that is easily damaged in storms. And they have fewer resources to adapt, which will require expensive measures like redesigning cities, engineering coastlines and changing how people grow food.  Already, between 1961 and 2000, climate change appears to have harmed the economies of the poorest countries while boosting the fortunes of the wealthiest nations that have done the most to cause the problem, making the global wealth gap 25 percent bigger than it would otherwise have been. Similarly, the Global Climate Risk Index found that lower income countries -- like Myanmar, Haiti and Nepal -- rank high on the list of nations most affected by extreme weather between 1999 and 2018. Climate change has also contributed to increased human migration, which is expected to increase significantly.  Even within wealthy countries, the poor and marginalized will suffer the most. People with more resources have greater buffers, like air-conditioners to keep their houses cool during dangerous heat waves, and the means to pay the resulting energy bills. They also have an easier time evacuating their homes before disasters, and recovering afterward. Lower income people have fewer of these advantages, and they are also more likely to live in hotter neighborhoods and work outdoors, where they face the brunt of climate change.  These inequalities will play out on an individual, community, and regional level. A 2017 analysis of the U.S. found that, under business as usual, the poorest one-third of counties, which are concentrated in the South, will experience damages totaling as much as 20 percent of gross domestic product, while others, mostly in the northern part of the country, will see modest economic gains. Solomon Hsiang, an economist at University of California, Berkeley, and the lead author of the study, has said that climate change ''may result in the largest transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich in the country's history.''  Even the climate ''winners'' will not be immune from all climate impacts, though. Desirable locations will face an influx of migrants. And as the coronavirus pandemic has demonstrated, disasters in one place quickly ripple across our globalized economy. For instance, scientists expect climate change to increase the odds of multiple crop failures occurring at the same time in different places, throwing the world into a food crisis.  On top of that, warmer weather is aiding the spread of infectious diseases and the vectors that transmit them, like ticks and mosquitoes. Research has also identified troubling correlations between rising temperatures and increased interpersonal violence, and climate change is widely recognized as a ''threat multiplier'' that increases the odds of larger conflicts within and between countries. In other words, climate change will bring many changes that no amount of money can stop. What could help is taking action to limit warming.  Back to top.  What will it cost to do something about climate change, versus doing nothing?  One of the most common arguments against taking aggressive action to combat climate change is that doing so will kill jobs and cripple the economy. But this implies that there's an alternative in which we pay nothing for climate change. And unfortunately, there isn't. In reality, not tackling climate change will cost a lot, and cause enormous human suffering and ecological damage, while transitioning to a greener economy would benefit many people and ecosystems around the world.  Let's start with how much it will cost to address climate change. To keep warming well below 2 degrees Celsius, the goal of the Paris Climate Agreement, society will have to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of this century. That will require significant investments in things like renewable energy, electric cars and charging infrastructure, not to mention efforts to adapt to hotter temperatures, rising sea-levels and other unavoidable effects of current climate changes. And we'll have to make changes fast.  Estimates of the cost vary widely. One recent study found that keeping warming to 2 degrees Celsius would require a total investment of between $4 trillion and $60 trillion, with a median estimate of $16 trillion, while keeping warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius could cost between $10 trillion and $100 trillion, with a median estimate of $30 trillion. (For reference, the entire world economy was about $88 trillion in 2019.) Other studies have found that reaching net zero will require annual investments ranging from less than 1.5 percent of global gross domestic product to as much as 4 percent. That's a lot, but within the range of historical energy investments in countries like the U.S.  Now, let's consider the costs of unchecked climate change, which will fall hardest on the most vulnerable. These include damage to property and infrastructure from sea-level rise and extreme weather, death and sickness linked to natural disasters, pollution and infectious disease, reduced agricultural yields and lost labor productivity because of rising temperatures, decreased water availability and increased energy costs, and species extinction and habitat destruction. Dr. Hsiang, the U.C. Berkeley economist, describes it as ''death by a thousand cuts.''  As a result, climate damages are hard to quantify. Moody's Analytics estimates that even 2 degrees Celsius of warming will cost the world $69 trillion by 2100, and economists expect the toll to keep rising with the temperature. In a recent survey, economists estimated the cost would equal 5 percent of global G.D.P. at 3 degrees Celsius of warming (our trajectory under current policies) and 10 percent for 5 degrees Celsius. Other research indicates that, if current warming trends continue, global G.D.P. per capita will decrease between 7 percent and 23 percent by the end of the century -- an economic blow equivalent to multiple coronavirus pandemics every year. And some fear these are vast underestimates.  Already, studies suggest that climate change has slashed incomes in the poorest countries by as much as 30 percent and reduced global agricultural productivity by 21 percent since 1961. Extreme weather events have also racked up a large bill. In 2020, in the United States alone, climate-related disasters like hurricanes, droughts, and wildfires caused nearly $100 billion in damages to businesses, property and infrastructure, compared to an average of $18 billion per year in the 1980s.  Given the steep price of inaction, many economists say that addressing climate change is a better deal. It's like that old saying: an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. In this case, limiting warming will greatly reduce future damage and inequality caused by climate change. It will also produce so-called co-benefits, like saving one million lives every year by reducing air pollution, and millions more from eating healthier, climate-friendly diets. Some studies even find that meeting the Paris Agreement goals could create jobs and increase global G.D.P. And, of course, reining in climate change will spare many species and ecosystems upon which humans depend -- and which many people believe to have their own innate value.  The challenge is that we need to reduce emissions now to avoid damages later, which requires big investments over the next few decades. And the longer we delay, the more we will pay to meet the Paris goals. One recent analysis found that reaching net-zero by 2050 would cost the U.S. almost twice as much if we waited until 2030 instead of acting now. But even if we miss the Paris target, the economics still make a strong case for climate action, because every additional degree of warming will cost us more -- in dollars, and in lives.  Back to top.  Veronica Penney contributed reporting.  Illustration photographs by Esther Horvath, Max Whittaker, David Maurice Smith and Talia Herman for The new_york_times; Esther Horvath/Alfred-Wegener-Institut  Veronica Penney contributed reporting.  (D2;D3;D6;D7)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4k0000d "
406		"    Her 'Crime' Finally Plays Again  By Darryn King  1,303 words 20 April 2021   1     Before the pandemic, Catherine Russell had missed only four performances of an Off Broadway perennial since 1987. She was onstage for its reopening.  On Sunday, before a small, masked, spaced-apart audience at the Theater Center, the most persistent show in New York made a return after what might be described as -- in the scheme of things -- a brief intermission.  Warren Manzi's ''Perfect Crime'' opened on April 18, 1987, and stubbornly stayed put. The unflashy murder mystery has remained more or less the same as everything changed around it. It took a pandemic to shut the show down for 13 months.  Until then, Catherine Russell, now 65, had missed only four performances in the lead role of a possibly murderous psychiatrist. She is also the general manager of the Theater Center, which is also the venue for ''The Office: A Musical Parody.'' That show is running again, too; Russell hands out tickets at its box office.  ''Perfect Crime'' was the first Off Broadway show with a live audience to open with approval from Actors' Equity. New York Mayor Bill de Blasio spoke before Sunday's show, telling theatergoers, ''The show must go on.'' Russell has been outspoken in her belief that the show might have gone on much sooner.  After her 13,524th curtain call, Russell selected a familiar spot in her book-lined office onstage to talk about 34 years of ''Perfect Crime.'' These are edited excerpts from the conversation.  Congratulations on reopening. How does it feel to be back?  It's wonderful being onstage in a room full of people. I value that so much, and this is what I always wanted to do. I'm selling the tickets before the show to the other show. I get offstage, and I go downstairs and take the garbage out of the dressing rooms on the third floor. Occasionally I plunge a toilet. I love every part of it.  I'm a person who likes stability who chose a field that wasn't very stable. But I've been able to have a fairly stable life in the theater.  What was it like to suddenly lose that stability last year?  I was fine! I missed being onstage, but it was fine not doing it. I didn't dream about it.  You weren't itching to do a version on Zoom.  Oh God no. I went to the theater every day to work. It's a few blocks from my apartment.  If I were not near a theater, I think I would have missed it. But I was still here, in my home away from home, teaching acting privately, and working toward reopening. We found extra unused paint and repainted walls unusual colors, fixed seats, Marie Kondo-ed the backstage areas.  I did a lot of research on how to make it safe, and spent a lot of time trying to figure out how, not just for me to get back onstage, but for theaters to open again in New York. We have our Atmos air scrubbers over there. It's very safe here.  You also organized a lawsuit against the city and state, pushing for reopening?  I felt really strongly that everything needed to be closed down and I was fine with that. But then things started reopening. Restaurants were open, gyms were open. Bowling alleys is what pushed me over the edge. I have nothing against bowling, but if you put your fingers in these holes and wear rented shoes, why can't you go to the theater? It was nothing malicious, but theater fell through the cracks.  The suit is still going on. We're pushing for 50 percent capacity. I think we will prevail.  Mr. de Blasio was here tonight. Did you bring this up with him?  No. I don't know if he knows that I'm suing him. I'm grateful that he and [Gov. Andrew] Cuomo let us open. But I'd like to be more open.  I'm also raising money to convert a garage down the street into a five-theater complex. We need more Off Broadway theaters, especially now after Covid. Smaller theaters are going to be more practical -- it's a lot easier to raise money for an Off Broadway show than a Broadway show. And I really think we need more midtown theaters that are clean and safe, and Covid-safe, that people feel comfortable going to. I built this place 15 years ago. I didn't know what the hell I was doing. So I kind of want to take what I learned here and apply it.  You must have missed interacting with audiences.  In normal times, I love talking to people after the show and hearing what they thought about it. Occasionally someone will wait for me afterward and say: ''You know what? I'm a librarian and I've never missed a day of work.'' That sort of mentality, showing up to work every day, strikes a chord in many people. They admire that.  There are no times when your heart's not in it?  People sometimes come thinking, She's going to be phoning it in. And I'm kind of like, Screw you! You can think I'm stupid or something for doing it, but I am not phoning it in. I've done it when I didn't feel well, I was really tired, when I was grieving horribly. But honestly, if I thought that I was phoning it in, I would say it's time to go.  Do you feel you've missed out on anything because of your commitment to the show? There must have been a few refused dinner invitations over the years.  I was actually engaged to somebody else when I first started doing ''Perfect Crime.'' He said it ruined his life. He did not want to be married to somebody who would be onstage eight times a week. Though I didn't know the play was going to run this long ... obviously.  But I was blessed to eventually be married to somebody who understood it. We got married at City Hall at 11 o'clock and had lunch at The Palm. Then I went back to work and he took a nap, and we were both really happy.  I notice there's a prop book of the complete works of William Shakespeare there. Do you ever fantasize about doing another play eight times a week?  I'm happy in this play. She's a really complicated character, and it's fun to find different aspects of this character as I've gotten older. I haven't gotten bored doing it.  One good thing about doing a play like this, it lets out whatever you've been feeling during the day. I can cry onstage, pick myself up, walk off the stage, and whatever I've been feeling is gone. Do you know what I mean? I don't want to say it cleanses the soul. That sounds pretentious. But it's a good way to use all the stuff that's happened to you in your life.  Does the character feel different to you today?  I think that my performance is a little different after the year that we've had. At the end of the play, I used to fall apart more. But she pulls herself together. She's a little steelier, a little stronger.  Catherine Russell backstage at the Theater Center after performing in ''Perfect Crime.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN TAGGART FOR THE new_york_times) (C1); Left, Catherine Russell with co-star Patrick Ryan Sullivan in ''Perfect Crime,'' and below left, backstage. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY THE THEATER CENTER; JOHN TAGGART FOR THE new_york_times) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210421eh4k0000f "
407		"    About a Fifth of Seniors Remain Unvaccinated  By Danielle Ivory and Keith Collins  1,100 words 20 April 2021   6     The United States has passed a significant milestone in its vaccine rollout: As of Monday, all adults are eligible for the Covid-19 vaccine in every state. More than half of the adult population has received at least one dose of a vaccine.  The country has come a long way since vaccines first arrived at hospitals and long-term care facilities in December. More than 209 million doses have been shot into arms. And universal eligibility comes on the heels of a confusing, patchwork system that may make a person eligible in one state, but not another.  But the next phase of the rollout will bring new challenges. Some scientists and state and local health officials believe that making more people eligible will ultimately get more people vaccinated more swiftly. But others have said they are worried that some of the most vulnerable people, including those 65 and older, may have trouble competing for a shot.  As it stands now, older adults are the most vaccinated age group in America -- quite likely because they have been eligible in most states for months. But about a fifth of those 65 and older, a group that is particularly vulnerable to serious complications and death from the virus, have not received even one shot. Among them are some residents of long-term care facilities, which have represented more than a third of overall coronavirus deaths in the United States for much of the pandemic.  In mid-March, President Biden challenged states to accelerate the rollout and expand eligibility to include all people 16 and older. And for the past several weeks, states have been shifting away from complicated phase-based plans that have prioritized certain vulnerable individuals, like older Americans, critical workers and those with certain medical conditions.  ''No more having to sort out if you're in or if you're out,'' Julie Willems Van Dijk, the deputy secretary of the Department of Health Services in Wisconsin, said in a speech in late March as the state made plans to expand eligibility. ''It's time to just move forward and get everybody with a shot in their arm.''  Vaccinations have sped up considerably since Mr. Biden's announcement, when providers were administering, on average, about 2.2 million doses each day. Now, about 3.2 million shots are given, on average, every day.  One by one, states have made eligibility universal, meaning all people 16 and older qualify for shots. On Monday, the last group of states opened the floodgates, and some experts expressed worry over unvaccinated older adults.  It may not just be those in some parts of the country who have difficulty snatching up fast-changing appointments online. Cindy A. Prins, an epidemiologist at the University of Florida, said that high-risk people who had been eligible for a vaccine for months but had not gotten one might be struggling with access.  ''There may be people who are not necessarily homebound, but maybe they don't drive,'' Dr. Prins said. ''Maybe it's not easy and convenient for them to get somewhere to get vaccinated.''  She said that adding more younger people into the mix could spur states and counties to open more mass vaccination sites, but those sites might be intimidating or uncomfortable for older people -- or anyone who is particularly vulnerable to the virus and does not want to participate in a crowded event.  ''I think there are some folks who want to get the vaccine, but they're still very worried about getting exposed to other people,'' Dr. Prins said. ''It's a little bit of a strange situation where we're like, 'Stay away from everyone, but please come here to our massive vaccine clinic.'''  Dr. Prins added that some older adults could be waiting until their regular doctors or other health care providers can give them the vaccine.  There are many reasons eligible people may not be vaccinated, including, in some areas, lingering issues of short supply, limited access to vaccination sites and confusing procedures for booking appointments. Some older people may also be hesitant or unwilling to get a shot.  The new_york_times recently analyzed vaccine records and voter records in every county in the United States and found that both willingness to receive a coronavirus vaccine and actual vaccination rates were lower, on average, in counties where a majority of residents voted to re-elect former President Donald J. Trump in 2020.  But the partisan split is smaller among older adults, and polling has suggested that older Republicans are less reluctant to get a shot than younger ones.  Back in March, when Debra Furr-Holden, an epidemiologist at Michigan State University, heard President Biden urge states to make all adults eligible for the vaccine by May 1 -- essentially, to scrap slower plans that emphasized certain priority groups with higher vulnerability -- she said she started to tear up with disappointment. It was not what she wanted to hear.  ''The eligibility categories were designed to ensure that those most at risk were served first,'' said Dr. Furr-Holden, who was appointed last year by Gov. Gretchen Whitmer to Michigan's Coronavirus Task Force on Racial Disparities. ''We've fallen very short of that goal.''  In March, a Times analysis showed that people of color in the United States, for example, had received a smaller share of available vaccines.  Dr. Furr-Holden said she worried that vulnerable people, who, for whatever reason, had not gotten a shot quickly enough were inappropriately being made to forfeit their place in line. And she worried that a new privileged priority group would emerge.  ''This is tantamount to sanctioned line-jumping,'' she said. ''You have transportation? You're at the front of the line. You've got the kind of job where you can stand at a mass vaccination site for five hours? You're at the front of the line.''  Those who are concerned that universal eligibility might sacrifice equity are thinking about creative solutions. Dr. Lisa Cooper, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Equity, suggested that, with the eligibility floodgates opened, health officials might directly encourage young people to help them vaccinate the older people in their lives.  She explained, ''We need to start asking the younger folks, 'Where's your mom? Your grandmother? Have they all gotten their vaccines yet? If not, we've got several slots and we want your whole family here.'''  Alyssa Burr, Timmy Facciola, Emily Schwing, Bonnie G. Wong and Tiffany Wong contributed reporting.  Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00059 "
408		"    Here to Help; A Recipe for Steamed Clams With Spring Herbs  By Melissa Clark  322 words 20 April 2021   3     A pot full of garlicky steamed clams needs nothing more than some crusty bread -- or even just a spoon -- to accompany it. In this version, tarragon and chives add a bracing freshness to the clams, while lime juice and zest brighten things up. Take your time when cleaning the clams; they need a good scrubbing under running water to remove all the sand and grit. If you do find grit in the sauce after cooking, either strain it through a sieve lined with a dish towel, or let it settle to the bottom of the pot and spoon the sauce off the top. This recipe also works with mussels if you add ¼ cup water to the pot along with the shellfish.  Time: 25 minutes  Yield: 2 servings  1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil  2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced  2 tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon  2½ pounds littleneck clams (about 30 clams), scrubbed  ¼ cup minced chives  Grated zest of 1 lime  Pinch of red-pepper flakes  2 tablespoons unsalted butter  1½ tablespoons lime juice  1. In a medium pot or large straight-sided skillet with a lid, warm oil over medium heat. Add garlic and tarragon. Cook until garlic is slightly softened, about 2 minutes.  2. Stir in clams and cover pot. Cook until clams open, 5 to 10 minutes. Use a slotted spoon or tongs to remove clams from pot, dividing them between 2 serving bowls. (Discard any clams that don't open.)  3. Stir chives, lime zest and red-pepper flakes into the pan sauce and let cook for 20 seconds. Stir in butter and lime juice, whisking until butter melts and sauce thickens slightly.  4. Spoon pan juices over clams. Serve immediately.  For more recipes, visit NYT Cooking  at nytcooking.com.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW SCRIVANI FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004u "
409		"    Walter Mondale, Former Vice President, Dies at 93  By Steven R. Weisman  4,527 words 20 April 2021   1     Under Jimmy Carter, he was the first V.P. to serve as a genuine partner of a president. His own run for the top position ended in a crushing defeat.  Walter F. Mondale, the former vice president and champion of liberal politics, activist government and civil rights who ran as the Democratic candidate for president in 1984, losing to President Ronald Reagan in a landslide, died on Monday at his home in Minneapolis. He was 93.  Kathy Tunheim, a spokeswoman for the family, announced the death. She did not specify a cause. But Mr. Mondale was prepared for the end. Over the weekend he spoke for the last time with former President Jimmy Carter, under whom he served; with President Biden and his wife, Jill Biden; and with Vice President Kamala Harris. And he sent a farewell email to his former staff members.  A son of a minister of modest means, Fritz Mondale, as he was widely known, led a rich public life that began in Minnesota under the tutelage of his state's progressive pathfinder, Hubert H. Humphrey. He achieved his own historic firsts, especially with his selection of Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro of New York as his running mate in 1984, the first woman to seek the vice presidency on a major national ticket.  Under President Carter, from 1977 to 1981, Mr. Mondale was the first vice president to serve as a genuine partner of a president, with full access to intelligence briefings, a weekly lunch with Mr. Carter, his own office near the president's and his own staff integrated with Mr. Carter's.  ''Fritz used his political skill and personal integrity to transform the vice presidency into a dynamic, policy-driving force that had never been seen before,'' Mr. Carter said in a statement on Monday night, expressing grief over the passing of ''my dear friend.''  President Biden said in his own message of condolence that when then-Senator Barack Obama asked him to consider running for vice president alongside him in 2008, ''Fritz was my first call and trusted guide.'' He said that Mr. Mondale's redefining the vice presidency ''as a full partnership'' had ''helped provide a model for my service.'' And he noted that Mr. Mondale ''was the first presidential nominee of either party to select a woman as his running mate, and I know how pleased he was to be able to see Kamala Harris become vice president.''  Throughout his career, Mr. Mondale advocated an assertive and interventionist role for the federal government, especially on behalf of the poor, minority groups and women.  ''I'm a liberal or a progressive,'' he said in an interview for this obituary in 2010. ''I didn't use the 'liberal' word much, because I thought it carried too much baggage. But my whole life, I worked on the idea that government can be an instrument for social progress. We need that progress. Fairness requires it.''  He furthered that cause during his 12 years representing Minnesota in the United States Senate, where he was a strong supporter of civil rights, school aid, expansion of health care and child care, consumer protection, and many other liberal programs. In 1974, he briefly explored running for president.  Two years later, Mr. Carter, a former Georgia governor, wanted someone experienced in Washington when he chose Mr. Mondale as his running mate. Before joining the ticket, Mr. Mondale got a promise that he would have a close working relationship with Mr. Carter, with influence on policy, noting that he had seen Mr. Humphrey marginalized in that post by President Lyndon B. Johnson in the turbulent 1960s. Mr. Humphrey urged him to accept the offer.  At the White House, Mr. Mondale was a leader of the administration's liberal wing, frequently clashing with Southern conservatives as he argued for affirmative action and more help for the unemployed and other spending programs as the economy soured.  He was sharply at odds with the president in 1979 as energy prices spiked and lines at gasoline stations stretched around the block. Mr. Carter had decided to address the turmoil in a televised speech to the nation from the Oval Office about what he perceived to be a ''crisis of confidence'' in the American spirit. Mr. Mondale not only advised against the speech; he was ''distraught'' when he heard the plans for it, Mr. Carter later wrote.  In his memoir, ''The Good Fight,'' published in 2010, Mr. Mondale called the episode ''the only serious falling out that Carter and I had in four years.'' The address -- known as the ''malaise'' speech, though that word was never used -- was followed by the firing of several cabinet members and a plunge in Mr. Carter's approval ratings, from which the president never recovered.  The Carter administration used Mr. Mondale for foreign assignments and for building domestic support for its foreign policy initiatives. His rapport with Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel helped bring about the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel negotiated by Mr. Carter at Camp David in 1978. Mr. Mondale then helped sell the treaty to the American Jewish community.  He also generated support in Congress for the Panama Canal Treaty and for nuclear arms negotiations with the Soviet Union.  ''You can divide every vice president in American history into two categories: pre-Walter Mondale and post-Walter Mondale,'' former Vice President Al Gore said.  Having lost some internal arguments on domestic matters, Mr. Mondale remained loyal and stumped the country for Mr. Carter against a liberal challenge for the party's nomination in 1980 by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts.  Mr. Kennedy assailed the administration's budget cuts and deregulation of energy prices, but Mr. Mondale argued that liberals and conservatives alike needed to face up to the dangers of mounting deficits, which many economists said were stoking inflation.  He hammered the same theme running against Mr. Reagan in 1984, warning that deficits resulting from the Reagan tax cuts in 1981 also had to be reduced, in part by tax increases that he said were inevitable no matter who won.  ''Let's tell the truth,'' he declared in his nomination acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention in San Francisco, referring to the need to tackle deficits. ''Mr. Reagan will raise taxes, and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did.''  The convention applauded his candor, but the Reagan camp pounced, gleefully portraying Mr. Mondale as favoring tax increases while the economy was surging. The Reagan campaign countered with an ad proclaiming that a new ''morning in America'' had dawned, and Mr. Reagan was swept back into office easily.  Mr. Mondale got less than 41 percent of the popular vote and lost every state except his native Minnesota, adding only the District of Columbia to his win column. (After his re-election, Mr. Reagan did end up raising some taxes.)  A rangy, square-built former college football player, roughly six feet tall, Mr. Mondale could appear formal and stiff in public. ''I'm not good on TV,'' he once said. ''It's just not a natural medium for me.''  But in speeches he could lift his flat, nasal Minnesota voice to soaring tenor cadences. He was jocular and self-deprecating in private, even a bit off-color when making fun of himself, but he also showed a zest for combat and a love of political stories, which he told with relish while enjoying a cigar (though he never allowed himself to be photographed with one). He was a fan of the subversively zany comedy of Monty Python and the darkly satirical movies of Joel and Ethan Coen, Minnesota natives themselves.  As vice president, Mr. Mondale and his wife, Joan Mondale, set an informal tone at the official residence. Trained in art history, Ms. Mondale, who died in 2014 at 83, was active in fund-raising for the arts, wrote a book on art for children and worked as a docent at the National Gallery of Art in Washington. The couple's marriage was considered one of the strongest in Washington.  While savoring the life of a public man, Mr. Mondale loved to retreat by himself or with a friend to fish for trout or walleyed pike in Minnesota lakes reachable only by seaplane. In the winter, he would go off and chop holes in the ice and fish for days on end.  His humor was dry. ''I was once asked why I fished, and I said it was cheaper than a psychiatrist,'' he said. In 1974, when he dropped his nascent presidential campaign, he said he did not wish to spend the next two years staying at Holiday Inns. Running for vice president two years later, he said he was amazed at how Holiday Inns had improved.  No Lying, No Bragging  Walter Frederick Mondale was born on Jan. 5, 1928, in the hamlet of Ceylon, in southern Minnesota, in a lake region less than five miles from the Iowa border. He was the second son of Claribel (Cowan) Mondale, a musician and piano teacher, and the Rev. Theodore S. Mondale, a farmer and Methodist minister.  The family name was originally Mundal, after the small town in Norway from which Mr. Mondale's paternal great-grandfather, Frederick, came to southern Minnesota in 1856. (Walter not only got his middle name in honor of his great-grandfather, but also inherited Frederick's nickname, Fritz.)  Mr. Mondale's father lost a series of farms in the 1920s and moved from town to town, subsisting on meager earnings while Mr. Mondale's mother gave music lessons and led the choir in each of Theodore's parishes. His parents believed in helping the less fortunate and never making a show of it.  Once asked whether he would be a good president, Mr. Mondale said: ''I have trouble answering that. If my father had ever heard me tell him that I would make a good president, I would have been taken directly to the woodshed. In my family, the two things you were sure to get spanked for were lying or bragging about yourself.''  Fritz Mondale was an average student but an enthusiastic football player; he broke his nose as a high school varsity halfback. He attended Macalester College in St. Paul before transferring to the University of Minnesota and graduating cum laude in 1951 with a degree in political science.  Steeped in the progressive political views of his father, Mr. Mondale joined the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party and became involved in its internal battle to oust Communists and their sympathizers. Mr. Humphrey, at the time the outspoken mayor of Minneapolis, led that fight, and in 1948 Mr. Mondale signed up for Mr. Humphrey's first Senate campaign. Mr. Humphrey became a friend who would influence Mr. Mondale's rise.  Mr. Mondale worked at odd jobs during his college years, including inspecting peas for lice at a local cannery. (After becoming vice president he liked to say that he was ''the only pea-lice inspector'' to have risen to such high office.) He took a year off to run the student arm of Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal advocacy group.  After graduation came two years in the Army, a return to the University of Minnesota for law school and marriage to Joan Adams, the daughter of a Presbyterian minister. They had two sons and a daughter. Their daughter, Eleanor Mondale Poling, a television and radio personality, died of brain cancer in 2011 at age 51.  Mr. Mondale's survivors include his sons, Theodore, who ran unsuccessfully for governor of Minnesota in 1998, and William, a lawyer; four grandchildren; and two step-granddaughters.  Mr. Mondale practiced law in Minneapolis until 1960, when the state attorney general resigned and Gov. Orville L. Freeman, who had been a partner in Mr. Mondale's law firm, appointed him, at 32, to fill the post. As a young law associate, Mr. Mondale had managed campaigns for Mr. Freeman, who was later secretary of agriculture under President John F. Kennedy.  Mr. Mondale went on to win election twice in his own right. He joined 21 other attorneys general in signing a brief that helped persuade the United States Supreme Court to uphold the right of counsel for indigent defendants in the landmark case Gideon v. Wainwright in 1963.  The following year he was thrust into national politics at the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City as head of the party's credentials committee. In that post he helped Senator Humphrey broker a deal, at President Johnson's behest, between segregated and integrated factions of delegates from Mississippi. The agreement produced rules banning segregated delegations in the future.  A twist of fate -- a vacancy, and then an appointment to fill it -- had propelled Mr. Mondale into state politics. Now came another that would send him to Washington. When Johnson selected Mr. Humphrey as his running mate, Mr. Mondale was chosen to fill Mr. Humphrey's Senate seat. He was sworn in by Mr. Humphrey at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center, where Mr. Mondale had had an emergency appendectomy. He was later elected twice to the Senate with no difficulty.  In the Senate, Mr. Mondale lined up in favor of Johnson's Great Society legislation, including the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and worked to enact fair housing laws against powerful opposition. He pressed for programs in education, child care, health care, jobs, desegregation and consumer protection.  One of his proudest legislative achievements, he said, was his leadership role in making it easier for the Senate to cut off a filibuster with 60 votes, under a rule change, rather than a two-thirds vote, as was previously required. One of his biggest regrets, he said, was his delay, until 1969, in turning against the Vietnam War.  By the 1970s Mr. Mondale's name was on lists of possible candidates for national office. Dutifully, he wrote a campaign book, ''The Accountability of Power: Toward a Responsible Presidency'' (1975), in which he criticized the ''imperial presidency'' of Richard M. Nixon, and then joined the race for the 1976 presidential nomination.  The campaign went nowhere. ''I remember that after a year I was running six points behind 'Don't Know,''' Mr. Mondale said in the 2010 interview. He ended the bid early, in 1974. In withdrawing, he said he lacked an ''overwhelming desire to be president.'' The comment would come to haunt him.  No. 2 With a Say  The Democratic victor, Mr. Carter, a conservative Southerner, was looking for a liberal running mate from the North who could help him pick up support in the industrial states. Mr. Mondale was at the top of everybody's list, but he had mixed feelings until he got an agreement from the nominee that he would have a full-fledged policy role, expanded from the largely ceremonial functions assigned to most vice presidents.  Mr. Mondale's chief of staff, Richard Moe, said Mr. Humphrey had been equally persuasive. '''Fritz,' he said, 'if you have a chance to be vice president, you should take it,''' Mr. Moe recalled.  In office, Mr. Carter was true to his word in giving him major responsibilities in the White House, Mr. Mondale said in 2010. ''Carter did listen to me a lot, I think,'' he said. ''I tried to avoid giving a win-loss record. But he was marvelous to me and to Joan. They never insulted our independence or integrity or position.''  Some in the president's circle, like Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security adviser, later belittled Mr. Mondale's input as consisting largely of political advice. In one instance, Mr. Mondale argued unsuccessfully against imposing a grain embargo on the Soviet Union after its invasion of Afghanistan at the end of 1979.  ''Mr. President, we need to be strong and firm, but that doesn't mean you have to commit political suicide,'' he said, according to the memoirs of Hamilton Jordan, Mr. Carter's chief of staff.  Besides the Middle East peace negotiations and the Panama Canal treaty ratification, Mr. Mondale was involved in efforts to save the ''boat people'' refugees from the Vietnam War, some of whom resettled in Minnesota.  He remained a favorite of Democratic core groups, including unions and teachers, and senior and Black communities. In support of affirmative action, he clashed with Attorney General Griffin B. Bell and other more conservative members of the Carter team.  Mr. Mondale's liberal advocacy became more problematic as Mr. Carter cut spending and favored tighter monetary policy to control inflation after 1979. A breach with the president erupted that summer, when unemployment, double-digit inflation rates, soaring energy prices and lines at gas stations led to the biggest internal crisis of Mr. Carter's presidency.  To address the economic disorder, the president scheduled a speech, then canceled it, deciding abruptly instead to hold a ''domestic summit'' at Camp David with a parade of public figures and intellectuals. The White House's 29-year-old pollster, Patrick Caddell, had counseled Mr. Carter to address what the pollster called a spiritual ''malaise'' enveloping the country, caused by the legacy of Vietnam and Watergate as well as the energy and economic situations.  After the summit, Mr. Carter took Mr. Caddell's advice over the objection of Mr. Mondale and others, emerging to proclaim in a nationally televised speech that a ''crisis of confidence'' was paralyzing the country and preventing action on energy.  Mr. Mondale was ''enraged and even vituperative'' in arguing against the speech, according to a 2018 memoir by Stuart Eizenstat, Mr. Carter's domestic policy adviser. The vice president argued that the president had succumbed to psychobabble from an inexperienced aide.  ''He was visibly upset, and his face became so red with anger that I feared for his health,'' Mr. Eizenstat wrote.  In his own presidential memoirs, Mr. Carter recalled that Mr. Mondale had been so ''distraught'' over plans for the speech that he adjourned a meeting at Camp David so that he could settle down his vice president as the two walked around the compound's grounds.  ''You're very tired and this is affecting your thinking,'' Mr. Mondale told the president, according to Mr. Eizenstat. As Mr. Mondale later put it, ''my position was that an administration that came in pledging to be as good as the American people should not change into one urging the people to be as good as the government.''  The speech boosted Mr. Carter's approval ratings, but only temporarily. Within days, Mr. Carter had dismissed several cabinet members, an action intended to signal to Americans that he was in charge. The ousters backfired, however, as the public perceived that the president had, in fact, lost control of his government. Mr. Mondale, who was close to some of those fired, later acknowledged that he had contemplated resigning or at least refusing to run for re-election with Mr. Carter.  Later in 1979, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the seizure of American hostages by Iranian revolutionaries at the United States Embassy in Tehran only deepened Mr. Carter's troubles.  Senator Kennedy's challenge to Mr. Carter for the 1980 presidential nomination divided Democrats, but it also evidently stirred Mr. Mondale's competitive instincts to protect the president. Though hailing from his party's liberal wing, Mr. Mondale stood by the president, helping him turn back the Kennedy challenge. But the split in the party weakened the Carter presidency irreparably.  On election night, as the magnitude of the Carter-Mondale defeat at the hands of Mr. Reagan sank in, some of the vice president's staff began sporting new campaign buttons: ''Mondale in '84.'' Mr. Mondale almost immediately started preparing for a run.  Fighting 'The Good Fight'  Mr. Mondale also began making money for the first time, at the law firm of Winston and Strawn based in Chicago, helping clients with business opportunities in countries where he knew the leadership. Some said he had become another influence peddler.  At first Mr. Mondale was an obvious front-runner in a field of Democratic candidates in which Senator Gary Hart of Colorado and the Rev. Jesse Jackson also looked strong. Mindful of his history as a dropout in 1974, he declared: ''I know myself. I am ready. I am ready to be president of the United States.''  As expected, Mr. Mondale initially raised more money, won more straw votes, did better in all the polls and received more endorsements than his opponents. Yet after an early victory in the Iowa caucuses, his campaign went into a tailspin, losing in the New Hampshire primary to the media-savvy Mr. Hart, who connected with voters by offering ''new ideas'' compared with he called the ''established past'' and special interests of Mr. Mondale.  ''Fritz, you cannot lead this country if you have promised everybody everything,'' Mr. Hart said in a debate.  ''Correct, and I have not,'' the former vice president replied, adding that his only promises were to workers, the poor and disaffected groups. ''America is nothing if it isn't promises,'' he said. ''That's what America is about.''  Mr. Mondale reignited his campaign by accusing Mr. Hart of lacking substance, memorably quoting a popular fast-food hamburger advertisement of the day when he asked in a debate, ''Where's the beef?''  After securing the nomination in the summer, Mr. Mondale stunned the political establishment by selecting Representative Ferraro as his running mate. Women's groups were elated, and the ticket got a burst of support. Mr. Mondale said it was one of his proudest achievements.  But in the fall, Ms. Ferraro's campaign foundered amid damaging disclosures about her family's finances, and the overwhelming disadvantage of running against a popular president as the economy was rebounding became painfully evident.  A momentary change in Mr. Mondale's fortunes came at the first presidential debate, when a rambling summation by Mr. Reagan raised doubts about whether he was too old for the job. (He was 73 at the time.) At the next debate, however, Mr. Reagan defused the ''age issue'' by declaring: ''I want you to know that also I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience.''  The audience burst into laughter, and so did Mr. Mondale (who was 56). ''I think the campaign ended right there,'' he said later.  After his humbling defeat, Mr. Mondale went back to Minnesota to practice law, involve himself in public affairs and teach and write as a fellow at the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs at the University of Minnesota. Then the election of Bill Clinton as president in 1992 opened a new chapter: The president sent Mr. Mondale to Japan as ambassador.  His tenure in Tokyo, lasting until December 1996, was highlighted by his negotiation of an agreement to shrink and move American military bases in Okinawa, where the abduction and rape of a 12-year-old girl by three American servicemen in 1995 had provoked outrage.  In 1998, Mr. Clinton named Mr. Mondale as a special envoy to economically troubled Indonesia.  Back in Minnesota, Mr. Mondale joined the law firm of Dorsey & Whitney in Minneapolis, but his political career was still not finished. In 2002, at the age of 74, he was drafted to run for his old Senate seat after the incumbent Democrat, Paul Wellstone, died in a plane crash 11 days before the election.  Mr. Mondale's impromptu candidacy was undone, however, by a raucous and emotional memorial service for Mr. Wellstone featuring partisan speeches by his supporters. It turned voters off, and they elected Norman Coleman, a Republican.  The race was Mr. Mondale's last hurrah, though he continued to speak out and serve as a party elder statesman. Associates said the Senate race defeat had actually energized him.  ''It allowed me to be the kind of liberal that I wanted to be,'' Mr. Mondale said in the 2010 interview for this obituary. He said that in theory, running for the seat was ''a really dumb thing to do,'' but that he had no regrets.  In 2018, Mr. Carter and leading political figures of the last half-century joined Mr. Mondale at the University of Minnesota to celebrate his 90th birthday, four years after he had recovered from triple bypass heart surgery. Indeed, the combined longevity of Mr. Mondale and Mr. Carter brought them a certain distinction worthy of a footnote in American history: In 2006, they surpassed John Adams and Thomas Jefferson as the president and vice president from the same administration who had lived the longest since leaving office. Mr. Carter is 96.  ''I once told the president, one thing I didn't want to happen is I didn't want to be embarrassed,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''In four years, I never was embarrassed, and I don't think any other V.P. can make that statement.''  In recent years, Mr. Mondale continued his active engagement in politics. He supported Senator Amy Klobuchar, a protégée who had interned for him in college and later worked with him in his law firm, frequently reaching out to check in and to offer advice in her unsuccessful campaign for president last year.  ''He never stopped believing in our country and in preparing a new generation of leaders to deal with the next set of problems,'' she said in a phone interview on Sunday.  In his 2010 memoir, Mr. Mondale acknowledged that in his later years ''the nation was no longer listening'' to the call for expanded government and social progress, but he still believed in liberal policies and the inspiration of the Apostle Paul.  ''I have fought the good fight,'' he said in closing that book. ''I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.''  It was a sentiment he echoed on Saturday in his farewell email to his many former staff members, beginning with ''Dear team.''  ''Well, my time has come,'' he wrote. ''I am eager to rejoin Joan and Eleanor. Before I go I wanted to let you know how much you mean to me. Never has a public servant had a better group of people working at their side! Together we have accomplished so much, and I know you will keep up the good fight.''  Walter F. Mondale was a partner to President Jimmy Carter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GEORGE TAMES/THE new_york_times) (A1); Walter Mondale, the Democratic presidential candidate, and Mayor Edward I. Koch of New York with students from P.S. 125 in Manhattan in 1984. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NEAL BOENZI/THE new_york_times); President Jimmy Carter with Vice President Mondale in 1979. Mr. Mondale was the first vice president to serve as a genuine partner of a president.; Senator Mondale rode with Senator Hubert Humphrey in the Aquatennial parade in Minneapolis in 1976. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ASSOCIATED PRESS); Mr. Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro in Portland, Ore., in 1984. He stunned the political establishment by selecting Ms. Ferraro as his running mate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACK SMITH/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A20)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004a "
410		"    Trailing in Polls, Stringer Scores Coveted Backing From Teachers  By Eliza Shapiro and Katie Glueck  1,552 words 20 April 2021   1     The endorsement comes at a critical time for the city comptroller, who has struggled to gain traction in the race.  New York City's influential teachers' union endorsed the city comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, in the race for mayor on Monday, providing a much-needed boost to a campaign that has struggled to gain momentum thus far, despite Mr. Stringer's deep experience in city politics.  Mr. Stringer is a decades-long ally of the United Federation of Teachers and was long considered the front-runner for its support. With nine weeks before the June 22 primary, the endorsement comes at a critical time: In the limited public polling available, Mr. Stringer consistently trails the former presidential candidate Andrew Yang and the Brooklyn borough president, Eric Adams.  In recent weeks, some labor leaders, political operatives and his own allies had privately worried about Mr. Stringer's viability in the race, as the more moderate Mr. Yang has threatened his Manhattan base, and left-wing activists and leaders -- expected to be solidly in Mr. Stringer's corner -- have not yet coalesced around a single candidate.  Mr. Stringer is hoping to assemble a broad coalition that includes both traditional sources of Democratic power -- in particular, union support -- as well as backing from the left-wing activist slice of the party that has been influential in several recent elections across the city. Last week, in an effort to build a unified progressive front, the Working Families Party endorsed Mr. Stringer as the party's first choice, followed by Dianne Morales, a former nonprofit executive, and Maya Wiley, a former counsel to Mayor Bill de Blasio.  Mr. Stringer referenced his position in the race during a news conference to announce the endorsement on Monday. ''This race is getting started,'' he said. ''I've been known to close strong, this union closes strong, and I promise you the race of your lifetime.''  The U.F.T.'s endorsement is coveted, because of the union's political influence and its ability to mobilize its roughly 200,000 members. Still, its members are split into several political caucuses and may not vote as a bloc, and the union does not have the same organizational prowess as other large city unions.  Over the last year, the teachers' union was at odds with elements of the city's push to reopen schools in the nation's largest school system during the pandemic, placing the U.F.T. under an unusual level of scrutiny. Some parents who were not politically active before the reopening debate became deeply frustrated by the pace of reopening and critical of the union.  It is not at all clear whether there are enough parents who have turned against the union to actually make a difference in the upcoming election; the vast majority of city parents have kept their children learning from home this year, and most city parents do not play close attention to union politics.  The city has now reopened all grades for in-person learning, with many younger students back full-time, though some high school students who have returned to classrooms are still learning online from inside their school buildings.  Mr. Stringer, who is himself a public school parent, was not a vocal supporter of Mr. de Blasio's push to bring students back into classrooms last fall and was sometimes sharply critical of the mayor's effort. Mr. Stringer and his wife decided to send one of their sons back into classrooms last fall and keep their other son learning remotely.  As comptroller, Mr. Stringer has also criticized the mayor's handling of the city's homeless student crisis, and appeared to briefly jeopardize the rollout of the successful universal prekindergarten program after he raised alarms about the contracting process for some of those programs.  Mr. Stringer's promise to put two teachers in every elementary school classroom as mayor is attractive to the union, since it would boost its membership. But the idea has also appealed to education experts who have said adding more teachers could make traditional public schools more attractive to parents who might have considered gifted and talented programs or private schools, which tend to have large teaching staffs.  Mr. Stringer is also one of a small group of mayoral hopefuls who have committed to eliminating the high-stakes exam that dictates entry into the city's top high schools, including Stuyvesant High School. Like many of his rivals, he is skeptical about charter schools, a position that is all but a prerequisite for the U.F.T.'s backing.  Mr. Stringer's campaign is likely to use the endorsement as fresh evidence that his coalition-building strategy remains viable. Perhaps more than any other candidate in the race, Mr. Stringer's candidacy -- already supported by a long list of prominent New Yorkers -- will test whether endorsements move voters in an unpredictable election unfolding amid a pandemic.  The U.F.T.'s choice of Mr. Stringer also carries enormous stakes for the union.  Unlike other powerful city unions, the teachers union has failed to endorse a winning candidate since 1989, when it backed the former mayor David N. Dinkins. That has prompted concern among U.F.T. officials that the union's clout in electoral politics could shrink if it again bets on the wrong candidate.  The former mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who clashed with the U.F.T. throughout his tenure, went so far as to call the union's endorsement ''the kiss of death'' during the 2013 race to replace him.  ''I don't know what goes through voters' minds, but maybe they understand if the U.F.T. wants it, it ain't good and you don't want that person,'' Mr. Bloomberg said at the time.  The outcome of the race could offer major clues about how much weight the U.F.T.'s endorsement -- or the backing of any municipal union -- still matters in local politics.  With the U.F.T. endorsement settled, most major municipal unions have made their choices -- with the notable exception of the union representing transit workers. Many prominent unions have backed Mr. Adams, but Ms. Wiley scored a major victory in February when she won the endorsement of Local 1199 of the Service Employees International Union, the city's largest union.  In some years, labor unions have largely flocked to a particular candidate. Mr. Stringer, for example, had overwhelming support from labor groups in his 2013 race for comptroller, when he defeated the former governor, Eliot Spitzer. But this year, the labor endorsements are diffuse.  One of the biggest open questions in the mayoral race is whether there will be any union-affiliated independent expenditure effort to stop Mr. Yang -- but it is not yet clear which organizations, if any, would have both the resources and the inclination to mount one.  Mr. Stringer has won the backing of other education unions, including the union representing school principals and administrators, and the union representing teachers and staff at the City University of New York. Mr. Yang has not earned a major union endorsement yet, but is leading in all publicly available polling.  The teachers' union membership includes about 75,000 active classroom teachers -- as well as roughly 64,000 retirees, many of whom no longer live in New York. About 90 percent of the U.F.T.'s delegate assembly -- a group of about 3,400 elected representatives, including educators from each school in the city -- voted to back Mr. Stringer on Monday afternoon.  The union has, for decades, played a major and occasionally decisive role in key education decisions, and that has been particularly true over the last year.  The U.F.T. made a number of safety demands last summer, and tensions escalated to the point that the union president, Michael Mulgrew, suggested that teachers would strike if those safety demands were not met. Public health experts supported many of those demands, such as improved ventilation, but some families were angered by the union's insistence that all rules remain in place even as teachers were vaccinated.  Advisers for Mr. Yang are hoping to attract at least some of those disaffected families.  During a recent interview on Fox Business, Bradley Tusk, the powerful political strategist and lobbyist who is, with his team, managing Mr. Yang's campaign, said his candidate ''takes positions that are a little at odds with the Democratic orthodoxy on things like education.  ''The teachers' unions [have] blocked the ability for students to come back into the schools of New York City,'' he added.  Though Mr. Yang accused the union of delaying school reopening in an interview with Politico, he walked back his comments during a recent U.F.T. forum held to determine the endorsement. Mr. Yang said he and Mr. Mulgrew had agreed that the mayor, not the union, was primarily to blame for any stumbles on reopening. City Hall officials say that last summer, the union represented a significant obstacle to reopening.  Dana Rubinstein contributed reporting.  Scott Stringer, the city comptroller, aims to assemble a coalition that includes support from unions and progressive Democrats. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BENJAMIN NORMAN FOR THE new_york_times) (A22)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004e "
411		"    What's the Secret of Biden's Success?  By Paul Krugman  953 words 20 April 2021   24     The president's party is finally comfortable in its own skin.  Stop me if you've heard this one before: A new Democratic president has inherited a nation in crisis. His first major policy initiative is a short-term relief bill intended to lead the way out of that crisis. He follows that bill with proposals to address longer-term problems and, if possible, to change American society for the better. His party holds majorities in the House and the Senate, but both of his initiatives face scorched-earth opposition from Republicans.  I could be describing the early months of either the Obama administration or the Biden administration. But there's one huge difference between them: Even though Barack Obama began his presidency with high personal approval ratings, his policies never had strong public support. Public approval for Joe Biden's policies, by contrast, is almost surreally high. Why?  To see what I'm talking about, compare polling on the Affordable Care Act -- Obamacare -- with polling on Biden's American Jobs Plan.  The A.C.A., famously, had negative net approval throughout the Obama years. Its image didn't improve until the Trump administration tried to kill it, and even then it faced overwhelming disapproval from Republican voters.  By contrast, Americans approve of the jobs plan by huge margins, and while elected Republicans are dead set against Biden's proposal, Republican voters on net support it.  What's the secret of Biden's success?  Part of the answer, surely, is identity politics. Let's be blunt here: The modern version of ''only Nixon could go to China'' may be ''only an old white guy can sell a new New Deal.''  Another factor working in Biden's favor is the closing of professional Republicans' minds. Even before conspiracy theories took control, Republican politicians were living in a mental bubble; in many ways the modern G.O.P. is more like a cult than a normal political party.  And at this point Republicans seem so deep in the cult that they've forgotten how to talk to outsiders. When they denounce every progressive idea as socialism, declare every center-left politician a Marxist, rant about ''job creators'' and insist on calling their rival the ''Democrat Party,'' they're talking to themselves and persuading nobody.  If you want to see Republican tone-deafness in action, look at Senator Marsha Blackburn's recent attack on the jobs plan. It's not really about infrastructure, she proclaimed; why, it would spend hundreds of billions on elder care. And she apparently imagined that voters would see helping the elderly as a bad thing.  Biden, then, benefits from having a nonthreatening persona and an opposition that has forgotten how to make persuasive policy arguments. But the popularity of Bidenomics also reflects the effectiveness of a party that is far more comfortable in its own skin than it was a dozen years ago.  Unlike Republicans, Democrats are members of a normal political party -- basically a mildly center-left party that looks a lot like its counterparts across the free world. In the past, however, Democrats seemed afraid to embrace this identity.  One striking thing about the Obama years, in retrospect, was the deference of Democrats to people who didn't share their goals. The Obama administration deferred to bankers who warned that anything populist-sounding would undermine confidence and to deficit scolds demanding fiscal austerity. It wasted months on a doomed effort to get Republican support for health reform.  And along with this deference went diffidence, a reluctance to do simple, popular things like giving people money and taxing corporations. Instead, the Obama team tended to favor subtle policies that most Americans didn't even notice.  Now the deference is gone. Wall Street clearly has a lot less influence this time around; Biden's economic advisers evidently believe that if you build a better economy, confidence will take care of itself. The obsession with bipartisanship is also gone, replaced with a realistic appreciation of Republican bad faith, which has also made the new administration uninterested in G.O.P. talking points.  And the old diffidence has evaporated. Biden isn't just going big, he's going obvious, with highly visible policies rather than behavioral nudges. Furthermore, these forthright policies involve doing popular things. For example, voters have consistently told pollsters that corporations pay too little in taxes; Biden's team, buoyed by the Trump tax cut's failure, is willing to give the public what it wants.  So Biden's 2021 isn't playing anything like Obama's 2009, and Republicans don't seem to know what hit them.  Of course, polls may change. Public support for the Obama stimulus, never very strong, plunged in the face of a sluggish economic recovery. Voters might sour on Bidenomics, too, if the economy disappoints.  But all indications are that we're heading for an economic boom, with G.D.P. growing at its fastest rate since 1984. If that happens, Biden's policies might get even more popular than they are now.  How all of this will translate into votes remains to be seen. But early indications are that Biden has achieved what Obama never did: finding a way to make progressive policies truly popular.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANGELA WEISS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00047 "
412		"    Law Enforcement  645 words 20 April 2021   15     Law enforcement  Journalists Say Police Assaulted Them at Protest  Tim Walz, the governor of Minnesota, on Sunday responded to reports that the state's police officers had assaulted journalists covering the unrest in a Minneapolis suburb, saying, ''Apologies are not enough; it just cannot happen.''  Protests have erupted in Brooklyn Center, Minn., in the wake of the death of Daunte Wright, a 20-year-old Black man who was killed by a veteran police officer during a traffic stop. Law enforcement officers have fired tear gas or pepper spray into crowds and have made dozens of arrests.  ''I think we all need to recognize the assault on media across the world and even in our country over the last few years is chilling,'' Mr. Walz said in an interview with a local CBS station. ''We cannot function as a democracy if they're not there.''  This past Saturday, a lawyer representing more than 20 news media organizations sent a letter to Mr. Walz and leaders of Minnesota law enforcement organizations detailing a series of alleged assaults of journalists by police officers in the past week. Journalists have been sprayed with chemical irritants, arrested, thrown to the ground and beaten by police officers while covering protests, wrote the lawyer, Leita Walker.  The letter provides details of some of the alleged incidents, including ones involving journalists working for CNN and The new_york_times.  A spokeswoman for The new_york_times Company on Sunday confirmed that Ms. Walker's letter represented the company's response.  education  Minneapolis Schools Shift To Remote Learning  Minneapolis Public Schools will shift to remote learning later this week in anticipation of the verdict in the Derek Chauvin trial, Ed Graff, the district superintendent, said in a notice sent to the school community last week.  The schools will shift to remote learning from Wednesday through Friday, but if the trial schedule changes, the district will ''re-evaluate, adjust plans and let families and students know as soon as possible,'' the letter said.  Monday marked the first return to the classroom for sixth-grade students in Minneapolis Public Schools since the start of the pandemic. Seventh and eighth graders will return on Tuesday at most schools, a spokeswoman for Minneapolis Public Schools said. Most high schools returned last week, and elementary schools in February. All grades will shift to remote learning for the trial verdict.  The notice also said that age-appropriate resources had been provided to teachers to aid in classroom discussion about the ''racism and violence that has been highlighted in these tragic incidents.''  ''As appropriate and as they are comfortable, teachers will give students the opportunity to process their feelings, how this feels to them personally and how they are impacted by having the eyes of the world on Minneapolis,'' the letter said.  Social media  Facebook Vows to Limit Disinformation on Verdict  Facebook on Monday said it planned to limit posts that contain misinformation and hate speech related to the trial of Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer charged with the murder of George Floyd, to keep them from spilling over into real-world harm.  As closing arguments began in the trial and Minneapolis braced for a verdict, Facebook said it would identify and remove posts on the social network that urged people to bring arms to the city. It also said it would protect members of Mr. Floyd's family from harassment and take down content that praised, celebrated or mocked his death.  Facebook said on Monday that it had determined that Minneapolis was, at least temporarily, ''a high-risk location.'' It said it would remove pages, groups, events and Instagram accounts that violated its violence and incitement policy; take down attacks against Mr. Chauvin and Mr. Floyd; and label misinformation and graphic content as sensitive.  The company did not have any further comment.  Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004x "
413		"    Military Begins Offering Vaccines to Detainees At Guantánamo Bay Base  By Carol Rosenberg  983 words 20 April 2021   6     The plan, initiated during the Trump administration, had been delayed after a political and public outcry.  The United States military began offering to vaccinate the detainees at Guantánamo Bay on Monday in an effort to protect troops stationed there and help restart the stalled war crimes hearings, an administration official with knowledge of the Pentagon plan said.  The U.S. Southern Command, which has oversight of the prison, sought permission during the Trump administration to vaccinate the detainees, who include Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four other men accused of conspiring to carry out the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. A memo dated Dec. 23 described the detainees as ''a high-risk community,'' and invoked both ''the Geneva Convention and Department of Defense guidance.''  But the Pentagon postponed plans to start the vaccinations on Feb. 1, after elected officials and victims of the attacks accused the Defense Department of putting terrorism suspects ahead of the American people, who were only just starting to get access to the vaccines in substantial numbers at that point.  By Monday, the official said, all of the adults at the remote base in Cuba had been offered a vaccine, including the troops and civilian Defense Department employees -- 1,500 in all -- who work at the detention operation. An undisclosed number of staff members at the prison had declined.  The Pentagon notified Congress on Monday of its intention to begin making the vaccine available to the detainees within hours.  The vaccines are not mandatory for the military or civilian Defense Department employees.  The administration official said the decision to vaccinate the detainees was intended in part to protect those service members who had declined to be vaccinated.  ''This is very much about the force protection of our people down there and the ability to move forward with the military commissions,'' said the official. Also, ''We have a legal obligation under international law to properly vaccinate these detainees.''  Taking the vaccine is also voluntary for the detainees, and it was not immediately known how many of the 40 who remained at Guantánamo Bay would accept the first shot of the two-shot Moderna Covid-19 vaccine. Many of them are approaching their second decade in U.S. detention and have chronic illnesses. The oldest is 73, and has a heart condition, diabetes and other geriatric illnesses.  The initiative to offer vaccines to the prisoners began last year when the chief of staff for Adm. Craig S. Faller, commander of the Southern Command, sought permission in a memo to the deputy secretary of defense for health affairs.  On Jan. 14, a week before President Biden's inauguration, the Pentagon's principal deputy general counsel at the time, William S. Castle, recommended that medical professionals be authorized to offer vaccinations to the detainees. He noted that the Pentagon ''has repeatedly asserted in litigation that detainees receive health care comparable to that which is afforded active duty service members on the island, and that the level and type of treatment are dependent on, and consistent with, the accepted medical standard of care.''  The U.S. military base at Guantánamo has about 5,500 residents, including about 250 school-aged children, and a foreign work force of about 2,200 Jamaican and Filipino laborers who work under Pentagon contracts. The children are too young to be offered the vaccinations, but the foreign workers have been offered them.  As of April 1, according to health officials at the base, all but about 400 adults were entitled to vaccines, and about 47 percent of those eligible had not taken a single dose. Health officials there would not or could not quantify how many of those people had affirmatively refused to obtain a shot, which were being offered at a base ballroom that before the pandemic had served as a bingo parlor.  It is also not known how many people have been found to be infected with the coronavirus at the base, which is separated from Cuba proper by a minefield. The military acknowledged two cases in the first month, both of service members who recovered, but then imposed a blackout on specific disclosures.  The military has managed to prevent a major outbreak there by requiring people arriving from the United States to quarantine for 14 days.  No hearings have been held at the war court in more than a year, and nearly none of the defense lawyers have traveled there to meet with the detainees because of the pandemic. The International Red Cross canceled a series of visits for the protection of the unvaccinated detainees, as well.  Those few lawyers who have traveled there and undergone the two-week quarantine reported that they then met their clients in conditions that they said made communication virtually impossible. The detainees and visitors were kept many feet apart, separated by plexiglass barriers and issued protective wear that left only their eyes exposed. They spoke through masks and found it difficult to hear.  The next proposed hearing on the war court calendar is Aug. 30, the date an Army judge has tentatively set for the arraignment of three prisoners from Southeast Asia who have been held without charge since 2003.  The defendants include an Indonesian prisoner known as Hambali and two Malaysian men, Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep and Mohammed Farik Bin Amin, who are accused of conspiring in the extremist group Jemaah Islamiyah's 2002 nightclub bombings in Bali, which killed 202 people, and the 2003 Marriott Hotel bombing in Jakarta, which killed at least 11 people and wounded at least 80.  No dates have been set for resumption of the Sept. 11 hearings.  A hospital bed at a clinic for prisoners at the U.S. military base in Guantánamo Bay. Inoculations are not mandatory for detainees. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003x "
414		"    Health Agencies Compromised Virus Evacuation Safety  By Noah Weiland  940 words 20 April 2021   6     A new report from the Government Accountability Office on the repatriation effort last year said that poor training and bureaucratic infighting left Americans unsafe.  WASHINGTON -- The government's confused effort to retrieve Americans overseas during the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic compromised the safety of the evacuees, federal employees and communities where they returned, according to a report published on Monday by Congress's nonpartisan watchdog.  The effort was so dysfunctional that federal health agencies could not agree on the purpose or terms of the mission, contradicting one another about whether it should be classified as an evacuation or a repatriation.  The investigation by the Government Accountability Office concluded that the evacuation of Americans from China was badly hampered as different divisions in the Department of Health and Human Services argued over which was responsible.  The Government Accountability Office said three agencies in the department -- the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response and the Administration for Children and Families -- ''did not follow plans or guidance delineating their roles and responsibilities for repatriating individuals during a pandemic -- an event these agencies had never experienced.''  The infighting undermined the earliest attempts to protect federal staff assigned to the mission and the Americans after they returned from China, where the coronavirus is believed to have originated.  The report, which took over a year to compile, built on previous reviews of the repatriation effort by health department lawyers and a whistle-blower complaint filed early last year. The department's top lawyer concluded last April that federal health employees without adequate protective gear or training interacted with Americans quarantined at a base in California, validating the whistle-blower's central complaint.  According to the report issued on Monday, the Administration for Children and Families, or A.C.F., began overseeing the repatriation of the evacuees. Then, lawyers at the Department of Health and Human Services determined that the flights from Wuhan, China, constituted an evacuation, not a repatriation, and were therefore the C.D.C.'s responsibility.  For that reason, A.C.F. officials said resources from the federal government's repatriation program were not used. But the Health and Human Services lawyers' decision was not communicated to the C.D.C., the report said, and Government Accountability Office investigators were not given an explanation of the distinction between repatriation and evacuation.  A focus of the report is the federal government's response at March Air Reserve Base, near Los Angeles, where the health agencies functioned independently and without coordination, the Government Accountability Office said. As the A.C.F. prepared for the evacuees in late January 2020, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response was abruptly put in charge on the day they arrived.  The office's incident management team ''was not mobilized until after the flight landed and did not deploy to the site until Jan. 31,'' the report said. That led to broad confusion about who was in charge, with Preparedness and Response officials believing they were there to support other agencies. Pentagon officials interviewed by investigators said that Health and Human Services employees ''lacked an understanding of how to finance the effort, obtain proper clearances and manage the health and safety of the mission.''  The report describes other significant missteps, some of which had already been made public. It cites last year's report from Health and Human Services lawyers describing a scene at the base in which an A.C.F. official told Health and Human Services employees to remove personal protective gear at a meeting with evacuees to avoid ''bad optics.''  The health agencies also struggled to stop those on the base from leaving in the absence of a federal quarantine order, which lasted several days, the report said. One person with the ''potential to spread'' Covid-19 tried to leave the base.  The investigators also wrote that federal health officials disagreed on which agency was responsible for infection control on the base, while the use of personal protective equipment was uneven among poorly trained federal employees there.  The dispute led to an almost comical bureaucratic tangle.  At first, A.C.F. and Preparedness and Response officials viewed the C.D.C. as the agency with more expertise and authority under a section of the federal government's guidance on repatriation procedures related to Ebola. But C.D.C. officials told their colleagues that the section was not applicable to other diseases, and that the agency was not responsible for managing the employees of other agencies. Still, the C.D.C. offered training after it was requested.  ''According to H.H.S., C.D.C. personnel on the ground provided inconsistent and informal infection prevention and control guidance for the first three days of the mission because of a lack of clear roles,'' the report said.  The investigators noted that the Department of Health and Human Services did not feature repatriation in its planning exercises for a pandemic and therefore was not equipped to coordinate such an effort. That could hamper responses to a future pandemic.  ''Until H.H.S. conducts such exercises, it will be unable to test its repatriation plans during a pandemic and identify areas for improvement,'' the report noted.  The Department of Health and Human Services agreed with the recommendations, the Government Accountability Office said.  A plane chartered by the State Department to evacuate Americans from China arrived at March Air Reserve Base in California in January 2020. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mike Blake/Reuters FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003w "
415		"    The New Super League Against the Old Order, Explained  By Tariq Panja and Rory Smith  2,074 words 20 April 2021   8     Whether you're a lifelong fan or an outsider who doesn't know your Manchesters from your Madrids, we've got answers to your pressing questions.  A little more than a year after European soccer found a renewed sense of unity in the face of the coronavirus pandemic, the sport now faces its greatest crisis in a generation.  Late on Sunday night, 12 of the world's biggest soccer clubs unveiled a plan to launch what they called the Super League, a closed competition in which they (and their invited guests) would compete against one another while claiming even more of soccer's billions of dollars in revenue for themselves.  The announcement cast doubt not only on the ongoing viability of the Champions League -- the sport's showpiece club competition -- but also called into question the very future of the domestic leagues that have been soccer's cornerstone for more than a century.  All of a sudden, it is not clear where soccer is heading, or what it will look like when it gets there. Here, then, is what we know so far.  First things first: What is a Super League?  The concept has been around for decades: a Continental competition that incorporates all of the most famous names from the Europe's domestic leagues every year into an event all their own. For a long time, it has effectively been something between an aspiration and a threat. Sunday night, though, was the first time anyone had given it a physical form.  Who gets to play in it?  So far, there are 12 founding members. The teams that have been the driving force behind the project -- Real Madrid, Manchester United, Liverpool and Juventus -- have kindly invited eight other clubs to join them: Barcelona and Atlético Madrid from Spain, Inter Milan and A.C. Milan from Italy, and the rest of the Premier League's self-appointed Big Six: Manchester City, Chelsea, Tottenham and Arsenal.  They expect to be joined soon by three more permanent members, though it is not clear yet why those teams have yet to disclose their involvement. Paris St.-Germain in France and the Portuguese giant F.C. Porto were seen as likely candidates, but both have distanced themselves from the project. The organizers are eager to have a team like Bayern Munich, the reigning European champion and one of the world's biggest clubs, but on Monday, Borussia Dortmund's chairman said that not only was his team out but also that Bayern agreed with his position.  Whatever the final roster, those 15 founding teams will form the league's bedrock. The full allotment of 20 clubs each season will be fleshed out by a rotating cast of five more teams, chosen through some sort of formula that the organizers haven't gotten around to deciding just yet.  That sounds a lot like the Champions League.  It does, to be fair. But the roster for the Champions League is set each year based on clubs' performance in their domestic leagues. The Super League will have permanent members who face no risk of missing out on either the matches or the profits.  How will it work?  The 20 teams will be split into two divisions -- 10 teams in each -- and then play one another home-and-away. At the end of the regular season, the top four clubs in each division will progress to a knockout round that will be familiar to viewers of the Champions League. The difference is that those playoffs will be held over the course of four weeks at the end of the season.  Will the Super League teams still play in their current domestic leagues?  That is absolutely their plan. It may not be the leagues' plan.  Is this about money?  Yes. According to their own estimates, each founding member stands to gain around $400 million merely to establish ''a secure financial foundation,'' four times more than Bayern Munich earned for winning the Champions League last season.  But that is just the start, really: The clubs believe that selling the broadcast rights for the Super League, as well as the commercial income, will be worth billions. And it will all go to them, rather than being redistributed to smaller clubs and lesser leagues through European soccer's governing body, UEFA. At the same time, the value of domestic leagues and their clubs will diminish drastically as they are effectively rendered also-rans every year.  Won't the Super League teams fight over all that money?  The founding members have decreed that spending on transfer fees and wages will be capped at a certain percentage of revenue, which -- theoretically at least -- gives owners far more chance to restrict their spending at the same time as they are maximizing their income.  Sounds good for those clubs. Their fans must be happy?  Not so much, no. The reaction has been one of spittle-flecked rage at the betrayal of tradition. It does not help that, though several of the clubs have released statements insisting they will consult with fan groups as the project develops, nobody thought to do that ahead of time.  It is hard, though, to be sure how universal the sense of outrage and betrayal is. There is a little evidence -- though it is hardly overwhelming -- of a demographic split in the reaction to the idea, and it may be that this is what the clubs are banking on: that older fans may be more wedded to tradition, and younger ones may be won over more easily.  Can my club join?  Not really. It might, perhaps, perform well enough in its domestic league to win one of the five guest spots in the Super League each season, though details on how the 53 teams who win one of Europe's domestic championships every year will be whittled down to five are thin.  But even then, the odds will be stacked against them: The permanent members will have access to the competition's commercial revenue, giving them a substantial financial advantage against everyone else.  Why is this happening now?  The easy answer is that the pandemic has cost all of Europe's clubs -- including, and to some extent particularly, the wealthy elite -- hundreds of millions of dollars in lost revenue. The super league is designed, to some extent, to offset that.  But this idea has been around for a while, and it has been gathering strength over the last five years or so. There are a host of factors behind that, ranging from the financial primacy of the Premier League and the arrival of a swath of American owners into that sport to what appears to be a plateau on the sale of television rights for the domestic leagues. There is also a mounting belief that, since the big clubs drive the bulk of the revenue, they should receive an even greater share of it.  Can anyone stop it?  That remains to be seen. UEFA, in conjunction with the various affected national leagues and associations, has vowed to use any measure available to stop the ''cynical'' breakaway. That could mean throwing the clubs out of domestic leagues, banning their players from representing their countries.  On Monday, UEFA's president, Aleksander Ceferin, sounded ready for a scorched-earth fight when he called the renegade clubs ''snakes and liars.'' But he also seemed to leave the door open for them to return if they abandoned plans that he said were based in ''greediness, selfishness and narcissism.''  All of the choices at his disposal -- and the leagues' -- carry a risk, though. Ejecting the biggest clubs in soccer from domestic leagues makes sense: After all, allowing them to play on would not only distort the competition financially -- they already have deeper pockets; this would effectively give them a spare pair of trousers -- but in a sporting sense, too. Why would they field full-strength teams? Would a championship mean anything?  But doing so would only make a wholesale breakaway more likely, which would, in turn, make those domestic leagues left behind even less attractive. Television rights for a Premier League stripped of Manchester United and Liverpool, for example, are not likely to be worth quite so much anymore. La Liga rights without Real Madrid, Atlético and Barcelona are another matter entirely.  It is possible that FIFA might step in, and issue the ultimate sanction on players who take part in a Super League: barring the players from representing their countries at the World Cup. Even that, though, may not be decisive, given the salaries they could earn in the Super League.  More likely is the intervention of various national governments, or possibly the European Union -- though on what grounds they would object is not entirely clear -- or a draining fight through various courts until the last legal recourse has been exhausted.  Is this a situation where the only winners are lawyers?  Not quite. The big clubs clearly believe the chance not only to increase their income but to control their expenditure is worth it. Their conviction that this is a chance to give fans more of what they want should probably not be dismissed entirely. It is hardly irrational to believe that regular games between some of the sport's most famous names will attract an audience.  But there are far more people who lose, right?  Yes. By some distance. UEFA now faces the prospect of its showpiece competition being devalued. The national leagues would be rendered largely irrelevant, and even the national associations -- the people who actually run soccer -- would be helpless bystanders.  But others would suffer more: the clubs who have been excluded, of course, and would now see their values and incomes plummet. But they also would be deprived not just of appeal and audience but hope, too; Europe's minor leagues, cast yet further into shadow; even players, who might find their negotiating position on salary weakened by the superclubs' ability to cap wages.  Most of all, it would explode the idea that anyone can, in theory, rise and fall on their own sporting merit. That may not be true in any real sense any more, and its absence may not hold back the major leagues in North America, but it is central to soccer's identity and mythology.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  What happens now?  As things stand, nothing is off the table. A long, unseemly legal quarrel seems unavoidable. The breakaway clubs have already filed papers designed to protect their interests, and their plans.  So it is going to happen?  That is difficult to answer with any certainty. There is still a suite of obstacles between here and there. And, crucially, it is hard to see how the clubs can back down at this point: This is no act of brinkmanship, as previous suggestions of a super league have been, to elicit more control or more money from UEFA.  They have invested far too much capital in the project, even in the last 24 hours, to turn back. A couple of the founding clubs -- principally Barcelona and Real Madrid, both in theory owned by their members -- may yet have internal power struggles to win, but it would be surprising if that had not figured in their thinking.  The absence of teams from France and Germany, including P.S.G. and Bayern Munich, gives UEFA some hope that it can deprive the new league of legitimacy from the outset. And it is possible the furious reaction will give some teams pause for thought: It is telling, for example, that as yet none of the plan's chief architects have come out to defend it.  There is one more test, of course: What happens if it launches and does not work, or at least does not work in the way the teams envisage? What if there are limits to the loyalty of fandom? They are banking on that not being the case, of course, but they do not know for certain.  Bayern Munich, above, which won the 2020 Champions League, is for now not in the Super League, but Barcelona and Real Madrid are. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID RAMOS; JUANJO MARTIN/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK); John Henry, left, of Liverpool, and Florentino Pérez of Real Madrid. Their teams are driving forces behind the new league. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARMANDO BABANI/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004l "
416		"   TIMES INSIDER  Painting a Picture of Climate Change  By Katie Van Syckle  700 words 20 April 2021   2     To help explain to children the urgency of a warmer planet, a visual journalist created artwork with a playful approach.  Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.  Climate change can be an unsettling subject for anyone, but it can be downright frightening for children. To explain the topic to young people, The new_york_times's Climate desk published a guide, ''Bad Future, Better Future,'' which includes ways they can help the environment.  To make the subject a little more accessible, Yuliya Parshina-Kottas, a visual journalist on the Graphics desk, created hand-painted illustrations using a type of watercolor called gouache. In an interview, she discussed the inspiration and intent behind the images. Her lightly edited answers are below.  How did this story come together?  I worked on a heavily illustrated piece that showed kids returning to school with masks and all of the ways that the classrooms were going to change. The visual style was different, and Hannah Fairfield, the editor of the Climate desk, reached out, saying she was interested in doing something similar to explain climate change to kids. We started kicking around some ideas, trying to figure out what would work well in this format. We landed on this idea: What would the future look like if we didn't do anything and we continued on the path we're taking now? And what would it look like if we made all these changes? We basically ended up with a kids' book.  How did you try to make the art accessible to children?  We definitely wanted to keep the visuals warmer and friendlier and more playful, and let it be a fantasy world, while still illustrating serious concepts.  Being a news organization, we wanted to stay true to the reality of things. Working with watercolors gave us the freedom to make fun illustrations. We worked with our amazing reporter Julia Rosen, who made the language inviting to the age group we're targeting, which is somewhere between ages 8 to 14. Claire O'Neill, the visual editor on the Climate Desk, shaped the visual and the written content, and Aliza Aufrichtig, a digital designer, built a unique interactive scrolling framework that made this format possible.  Are you an illustrator in addition to being a designer?  I'm actually more of a 3-D animator, and I've been involved with a lot of emerging technologies over the years. But in my spare time I'm more of a traditional animator and illustrator -- that's what I do for fun when the kids go to sleep. I haven't been able to do that for my new_york_times work until now.  I understand that to create these illustrations you painted each body part -- head, arms, legs -- then scanned them and pieced them all together.  While I love illustrating, personally, I'm not the strongest illustrator. I actually find it challenging to draw a figure and envision how they will all go together. I paint on watercolor paper, using gouache. Then I scan it and build it in Photoshop. I'll cut the head out, I'll cut the body out and I'll put them together. These are just basically little Frankenstein people.  Has this been something of a passion project for you?  A lot of my personal work is in fairy-tale land. I am obsessed with folklore, so a lot of the things I draw are related to folklore, or to women's issues. It's kind of in a different world. This is definitely a work of passion. The number of hours that I put into this goes beyond anything I've worked on. This has been kind of building in the background while I was working on more serious Covid-related pieces. While climate change is frightening, this is a visually happy place to be.  Yuliya Parshina-Kottas, a visual journalist on the Graphics desk, spent hours creating hand-painted illustrations for a climate change guide for children. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YULIYA PARSHINA-KOTTAS)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004t "
417		"    Court Signals Its Support For Limiting Green Cards  By Adam Liptak  675 words 20 April 2021   12     The justices heard arguments on whether immigrants with ''temporary protected status'' who entered the country illegally may apply for lawful permanent residency.  WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court seemed ready on Monday to rule that immigrants allowed to stay in the United States temporarily for humanitarian reasons may not apply for green cards if they had entered the country unlawfully.  The case, which could affect tens of thousands of immigrants, was brought by Jose Sanchez and Sonia Gonzalez, natives of El Salvador who entered the United States unlawfully in the late 1990s. In 2001, after earthquakes devastated El Salvador, the United States made that country's nationals eligible for the ''temporary protected status'' program, which shields immigrants from parts of the world undergoing armed conflicts and natural disasters from deportation and allows them to work in the United States.  Mr. Sanchez and Ms. Gonzalez, a married couple, were granted protection under the program. In 2014, they applied for lawful permanent residency, commonly known as a green card. After their application was denied, they sued.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, ruled against them, saying they were ineligible under a part of the immigration laws that requires applicants to have been ''inspected and admitted'' into the United States.  Temporary protected status, Judge Thomas M. Hardiman wrote for the unanimous three-judge panel, ''does not constitute an admission.''  ''As its name suggests,'' he wrote, ''this protection is meant to be temporary.''  The law has interlocking provisions, some of which are hard to reconcile, Justice Stephen G. Breyer said. ''I have to admit that the immigration statute is pretty complicated,'' he said.  Amy M. Saharia, a lawyer for the couple, relied on another provision, this one saying that people granted temporary protected status ''shall be considered as being in, and maintaining, lawful status as a nonimmigrant.'' She said that meant they had effectively been admitted to the United States.  ''Having been inspected and admitted,'' she said, ''is inherent in having nonimmigrant status.''  The argument met with resistance from the justices.  ''I can't follow the logic of your main submission,'' Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. told Ms. Saharia.  Justice Clarence Thomas noted that the couple ''clearly were not admitted at the borders.''  ''So is that a fiction?'' he asked. ''Is it metaphysical? What is it? I don't know.''  Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh said, ''You have an uphill climb, textually speaking.'' He added that the court could let Congress address the matter.  Michael R. Huston, a lawyer for the federal government, said that many people with temporary protected status can apply for green cards -- so long as they had entered the country lawfully. ''They need to have been admitted as a student or an au pair or a temporary worker or something like that,'' he said.  The case, Sanchez v. Mayorkas, No. 20-315, put the Biden administration in a difficult spot. It sought to win only provisionally while leaving room for it to change the government's approach.  Chief Justice Roberts said there was a tension in the administration's position and suggested that it had softened the government's stance after the election.  ''I was struck by the extent to which your brief undersold your position,'' he told Mr. Huston.  ''Throughout it,'' the chief justice said, ''you said things like the text doesn't foreclose your position; the court was not required to accept the petitioners' reading; the statute does not clearly exclude your reading; Congress did not unambiguously mandate the opponent's position.''  ''And, of course,'' he said, ''you ended by saying that it would not be entirely unreasonable for the court to rule in your favor.''  ''I made that last one up,'' Chief Justice Roberts admitted, ''but that's what I was expecting to see.''  The case heard by the Supreme Court on Monday could affect tens of thousands of immigrants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Stefani Reynolds for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003t "
418		"    France Enabled Genocide In Rwanda, Report Says  By Abdi Latif Dahir  880 words 20 April 2021   9     A report commissioned by the Rwandan government accuses France of enabling the genocide of at least 800,000 people and of withholding ''critical documents and testimony.''  NAIROBI, Kenya -- France played a ''significant'' role in ''enabling a foreseeable genocide'' in Rwanda, according to a report commissioned by the Rwandan government that was released Monday and that echoed the findings of a recent appraisal by France.  The report offered a damning new perspective on the events that led to the killing of at least 800,000 people in 1994, arguing that France ''did nothing to stop'' the slaughter of ethnic Tutsi by a Rwandan government dominated by members of the Hutu ethnic group.  Twenty-seven years after the genocide, both France and Rwanda are making attempts to set the record straight on what happened during the bloodletting, government officials have said, both to respond to domestic demands and to improve bilateral relations.  The 600-page report, generated by a Washington law firm, concluded that the French government was ''neither blind nor unconscious'' in regard to the imminent genocide, yet continued in its ''unwavering support'' for the government of the Rwandan president then, Juvénal Habyarimana. It accused the government of the French president at the time, François Mitterrand, of doing so in order to advance and reinforce its own influence and interests in the country.  A landlocked nation of over 12 million people in central Africa, Rwanda was a Belgian colony until it gained independence in 1962. But during the genocide, France, which had close ties with the Habyarimana government, sent its troops to Rwanda as part of a United Nations-mandated military operation.  ''French officials armed, advised, trained, equipped, and protected the Rwandan government, heedless of the Habyarimana regime's commitment to the dehumanization and, ultimately, the destruction and death of Tutsi in Rwanda,'' the report said.  The report also accused France of covering up its role in the genocide -- which took place over roughly 100 days -- protecting those who participated in the killings and withholding ''critical documents and testimony'' that would shed more light on its actions.  The report's authors, however, found ''no evidence that French officials or personnel participated directly in the killing of Tutsi during that period.''  Last month, France released a report concluding that the French government bore ''overwhelming responsibilities'' for the genocide, as it remained allied with the ''racist, corrupt and violent'' Hutu-led government even as the leadership prepared to slaughter the Tutsis. But the report, commissioned by President Emmanuel Macron and written by historians, cleared the French of complicity in the genocide.  During a ceremony this month in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, to mark the 27th anniversary of the genocide, President Paul Kagame praised the French report, saying it showed how ''Rwandan lives were just pawns in geopolitical games.''  ''We welcome this report because it marks an important step toward a common understanding of what took place,'' Mr. Kagame said. ''It shows the desire even for leaders in France to move forward with a good understanding of what happened.''  The report comes as Mr. Kagame faces increasing criticism abroad over his government's handling of critics, including the continuing terrorism case against the former hotelier Paul Rusesabagina.  The Rwandan government in 2017 commissioned the Washington law firm Levy Firestone Muse to investigate France's role in the genocide against the Tutsi. The firm's report draws on a range of sources, including government reports, videos, documentaries, and interviews with more than 250 witnesses.  France and Rwanda have for years tussled over accounts of how the genocide transpired and the extent of French complicity. But relations have gradually started to thaw. In 2018, Mr. Macron backed Rwanda's former foreign minister Louise Mushikiwabo to lead the International Organization of La Francophonie, a coalition of French-speaking countries -- a move that was widely seen as an effort to bolster relations with Kigali.  Mr. Kagame has also visited France at least three times since 2018, and French media have reported that Mr. Macron might visit Rwanda this year. Nicolas Sarkozy was the last French president to visit Rwanda, in 2010.  In recent years, several cases related to the genocide have surfaced in French courts.  Last May, Félicien Kabuga, who was accused of financing the genocide, was arrested in Paris after more than two decades on the run. In July, a French appeals court ended an investigation into the plane crash that killed Mr. Habyarimana, an event that set off the 1994 genocide and for which Mr. Kagame's allies were blamed. And a Rwandan priest was arrested in France last week for his alleged role in aiding those who killed people in his church during the genocide.  In an interview with the French newspaper Le Monde on Monday, Rwanda's foreign affairs minister, Vincent Biruta, said the new report would ''contribute to the reconciliation between France and Rwanda.''  Mr. Biruta added, ''If apologies were to be formulated one day, it would be a step in the right direction to restore trust.''  Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting from Paris.  Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting from Paris.  At least 800,000 people were killed in the 1994 bloodletting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SIMON WOHLFAHRT/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004h "
419		"    Relief for Small Businesses as P.P.P. Nears End  By Stacy Cowley  850 words 20 April 2021   3     New programs for restaurants and live-event businesses will soon start taking applications as the Paycheck Protection Program winds down.  The federal government is preparing to open two new industry-specific small-business relief programs, one of them months in the works, as its signature pandemic aid effort, the Paycheck Protection Program, nears its end.  The Small Business Administration said it hopes to start taking applications by the end of this week for a $16 billion grant fund for live-event businesses like theaters and music clubs. The program, the Shuttered Venue Operators Grant, was supposed to begin nearly two weeks ago, but its application system malfunctioned and collapsed, stymieing thousands of desperate businesses that have been waiting months for the promised aid.  On Saturday, the agency posted additional details on its forthcoming Restaurant Revitalization Fund, a $28.6 billion support program for bars, restaurants and food trucks whose sales were devastated by the shutdowns that states imposed in response to the pandemic. The fund was created as part of last month's $1.9 trillion economic support package. Within the next two weeks, it will begin a seven-day test intended to help the agency avoid the kind of technical fiasco that plagued the venue program.  The agency has not announced a specific start date for either grant program.  ''Help is here,'' Isabella Casillas Guzman, the agency's administrator, said of the restaurant program. ''We're rolling out this program to make sure that these businesses can meet payroll, purchase supplies and get what they need in place to transition to today's Covid-restricted marketplace.''  Both programs offer recipients grants of up to $10 million to replace a portion of their lost sales. But both programs -- which will distribute money on a first-come-first-served basis, subject to some priority rules -- are expected to run out of money quickly. The money in the restaurant fund, in particular, falls far short of its needs, agency officials have acknowledged.  ''Everyone should apply on Day 1,'' Patrick Kelley, the head of the agency's Office of Capital Access, told attendees at a webinar last week organized by the Independent Restaurant Coalition. Lawmakers projected at least $120 billion in demand for the restaurant fund, Mr. Kelley said, but provided money for less than a quarter of that amount.  The law creating the restaurant fund required a 21-day exclusive period for businesses that are majority-owned by women, veterans or socially disadvantaged individuals. The S.B.A. said that group includes those who are Black and Hispanic, as well as Native Americans, Asian-Pacific Americans and South Asian Americans.  That period alone will almost certainly exhaust the restaurant fund. Applicants will be asked to self-certify their eligibility for the priority period, the Small Business Administration said.  Participants in the fund's seven-day pilot period will be picked randomly from current Paycheck Protection Program borrowers who meet the priority period criteria, the agency said. They will help test the system but will not receive grant money until the application system opens publicly.  The S.B.A. has offered few details on the technical meltdown that demolished its application system for the live-events grant program. On the day it was supposed to open, frustrated applicants spent more than four hours reloading a broken site before the agency shut it down. No applications were accepted.  ''After our vendors fixed the root cause of the initial tech issues, more in-depth risk analysis and stress tests identified other issues that impact application performance,'' Andrea Roebker, an agency spokeswoman, said on Friday. ''The vendors are quickly addressing and mitigating them and working tirelessly with our team so the application portal can reopen A.S.A.P. and we can deliver this critical aid.''  A spokeswoman for Salesforce.com, whose technology underpins the system, said the company ''worked with S.B.A. to resolve initial technical issues, and we're continuing our work together to enhance the site's performance.''  The restaurant fund is run by a different part of the agency and uses a separate technology system than the shuttered venue program. After waiting nearly four months for that program to start, industry businesses can't hold out much longer, said Audrey Fix Schaefer, a spokeswoman for National Independent Venue Association, a trade group.  ''Landlords can't last forever. Eviction notices are coming. People are saying, 'We can't do this anymore,''' she said.  The Paycheck Protection Program, created just weeks after the pandemic took hold, has made $762 billion in forgivable loans to millions of businesses over the last year.  It is scheduled to end May 31, but it appears likely to exhaust its funding before that. As of the middle of last week, the program had $44 billion left, an S.B.A. spokesman said.  President Biden extended the Paycheck Protection Program deadline last month. Two small-business relief programs are expected to open within weeks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004j "
420		"    N.Y.P.D. Agrees to Limit Its Use of 'Sound Cannon' As Way to Control Crowds  By Colin Moynihan  1,150 words 20 April 2021   21     The Police Department has agreed to stop using an ''alert'' noise on the devices after demonstrators and photographers sued, saying it caused migraines and dizziness.  Police officers first deployed the earsplitting beeps against protesters more than a decade ago in Pittsburgh: Painfully loud noises emitted from a powerful speaker atop a police vehicle, a crowd-control device known informally as a ''sound cannon.''  Since then the items, called Long Range Acoustic Devices, or LRADs, have provided a soundtrack to marches and demonstrations in New York, Portland, Ore., and other cities. They have functioned as giant megaphones to give commands, but also produced shrieks that can be louder than a lawn mower or a police siren.  Now, the New York City Police Department has agreed in a legal settlement to stop using the shrill beeping -- referred to as the ''deterrent'' or ''alert'' tone -- becoming one of the first big city departments to do so.  The legal settlement, filed with the court on Monday, comes five years after a group of demonstrators and photographers sued the city in Federal District Court in Manhattan, saying they had experienced migraines, sinus pain, dizziness, facial pressure and ringing in their ears after being exposed to blasts of high-pitched beeps from a hand-held LRAD in Midtown Manhattan in 2014.  One plaintiff, Anika Edrei, a photography student at the time, experienced a migraine headache for about a week after being exposed to the device in 2014 and steered clear of protests for some time after that, according to the lawsuit.  ''I was worried about getting injured again,'' Mx. Edrei said. ''It definitely had a chilling effect.''  Under the terms of the settlement, police officers will still be able to make voice announcements on the devices, but the painful ''alert tone'' will be banned.  The city will also pay a total of $98,000 in damages to five plaintiffs as well as $650,000 in legal fees to their lawyers, according to court documents.  As part of the deal, the police have agreed to add a section to the department's administrative guide on when and how to use the devices. Some of the new language will say that police supervisors and department lawyers may authorize their use, but that officers ''must make reasonable efforts to maintain minimum safe distances between the LRAD and all persons within its cone of sound.''  The department has also agreed to change its training materials on the devices and provide lawyers for the people who sued with details of those proposed amendments before implementing them.  The lawyers -- Gideon Oliver, Elena Cohen, and Michael Decker -- said in an email they would circulate the new training materials, ''providing some degree of transparency in a process that normally occurs behind closed doors and without any community input.''  The lawyers said that it appeared that the police in New York had used the deterrent tone sparingly, if at all, since the lawsuit was filed.  The New York City Law Department described the settlement as in the best interest of both sides. ''The N.Y.P.D. has found a path forward that satisfies both law enforcement needs and the plaintiffs' concerns about the use of the LRAD,'' a spokeswoman, Kimberly Joyce, said.  In response to a request for comment, the Police Department referred the law department's statement.  The Long Range Acoustic Device was developed in part as a response to a terrorist attack on a Navy destroyer, the U.S.S. Cole, off the coast of Yemen in 2000. It is capable of projecting a narrowly focused beam of sound loud enough to repel potential attackers and has been used to defend cruise ships and tankers against pirates.  But the devices have also been marketed to American police departments. In 2020, the company that produces them, Genasys Inc., said that agencies and departments in more than 450 U.S. cities used the devices.  News reports have described widespread use of the devices to transmit announcements in cities and towns like Rapid City, S.D., where one was used to broadcast a recorded message from a woman to her teenage grandson, whom the police wanted to question in connection with a shooting.  One of the first reported uses of the shrill tones in the United States came in 2009, during protests in Pittsburgh connected to the Group of 20 meetings. Demonstrators, journalists and onlookers fled, and some used moistened tissues or filters from discarded cigarette butts as improvised earplugs. The city later paid $72,000 to a university professor who said her hearing had been damaged.  Last summer and fall, as Black Lives Matter rallies swept the country, use of the sharp beeping tones was reported during protests in cities including Rochester, N.Y., and Kenosha, Wis.  The New York City Police Department bought two of the devices for $70,000 in 2004 as part of its preparations for the Republican National Convention, held that year at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan. At the time, police officials said that they would be used only for announcements, and that the deterrent function would not be employed.  The first sustained use of the deterrent function in New York appeared during a wave of protests in 2014, after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict an officer who had placed Eric Garner in the chokehold that led to his death.  The bulky square model used in New York during those protests can produce sound of up to 137 decibels at one meter, according to an instructor's guide created by the Police Department in 2018, which was produced as evidence in the lawsuit. That guide describes a level of 130 decibels as the ''pain threshold.''  According to the suit, officers used the device around 57th Street and Madison Avenue in Manhattan, sometimes turning it toward protesters who were within 10 feet while ''repeatedly firing its so-called 'deterrent' tone.'' That violated the protesters' constitutional rights, the suit argued.  The city responded that the use of the device had been ''objectively reasonable,'' because protesters had been blocking traffic; some had also thrown bags of garbage in the air and had hurled what were believed to be glass bottles toward police officers making arrests.  In 2017, Judge Robert Sweet ruled that use of an LRAD did not violate the First and Fourth Amendment rights of the demonstrators who had sued. But he also likened the devices to ''concussion grenades'' and found that there was an arguable claim that their use violated the 14th Amendment rights of the protesters to equal protection and due process.  A police officer held a Long Range Acoustic Device, or ''sound cannon,'' as protesters marched through Times Square in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY John Minchillo/Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004f "
421		"    Bad Timing for a Convention Center Upgrade  By Patrick McGeehan  1,326 words 20 April 2021   4     New York has just spent $1.5 billion to entice very large groups of people to gather under the same roof. When will that seem like a good idea again?  Construction crews are putting the finishing touches on a major expansion of New York City's main convention hall, the Javits Center. By early summer, it should be ready again to host trade shows, corporate meetings and public events.  But the pandemic wiped out mass gatherings more than a year ago, and it is not clear when or if most of them will return. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is still warning people to ''avoid large events and gatherings.''  New York is expanding the Javits Center ''just in time to see the absolute collapse of the convention and trade show business,'' said Heywood Sanders, a professor at the University of Texas at San Antonio who studies the convention business.  The biggest annual events at the Javits Center, including the New York International Auto Show, Comic Con and trade shows like Toy Fair, have been canceled over the last 13 months. Some, like Book Expo, an annual gathering of publishers and booksellers, have been shelved for good.  ''Event activity has fallen off the cliff nationally,'' Professor Sanders said.  The Javits expansion, funded primarily by a $1 billion allocation in the state budget backed by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, was intended to make New York more competitive in the escalating competition for trade shows and the crowds they attract.  Several other cities, including Las Vegas, Seattle and San Francisco, have invested billions of dollars in the last several years to make their convention halls bigger and more appealing.  Then the pandemic struck.  When the outbreak brought nonessential travel to a halt, Orlando, Fla., suspended the latest expansion of its convention center, which already was more than twice the size of the Javits facility.  Many big convention centers remain closed, though in some states, including Florida, Georgia and Texas, they are hosting events again, said Brad Mayne, chief executive of the International Association of Venue Managers.  Mr. Mayne said his own organization planned to hold its annual meeting in Atlanta in early August but expects only about 900 socially distanced members, compared with about 2,300 attendees in past years.  ''To really start getting back to normal, I think that you're going to see that happening in 2022,'' he said.  The work on Javits was also suspended last spring, but it resumed after two months, putting the project only slightly behind schedule, said Alan Steel, chief executive of the New York Convention Center Operating Corporation.  Since New York went on lockdown in March 2020, the Javits Center has been a giant health care facility. In the early weeks of the pandemic, it was converted into an emergency hospital with 2,500 beds. Then, after remaining empty for several months, it reopened as a public vaccination center, providing more than 10,000 shots per day.  It is unclear when the Javits Center will stop serving that role and revert to its normal purpose. Construction, which had been scheduled for completion in March, should be finished by late May at the budgeted cost of $1.5 billion, Mr. Steel said.  The first in-person events on its posted calendar are not until late July.  They could begin with an Amazon corporate event, but Mr. Steel said it was too soon to know what restrictions on capacity and rules on social distancing would still be in place by then.  ''We're expecting them to change over the next couple of months,'' he said. ''We're kind of in a little bit of uncharted territory.''  The additions, which will increase the total space for events from about 2 million square feet to 3.3 million, will add meeting rooms, a ballroom, a rooftop pavilion and a staging area for the trucks that deliver the exhibits, Mr. Steel said.  The auto show, which routinely drew more than 1 million people to see the latest models automakers had to offer, has reserved several days in August but has not committed to holding the event.  There are also questions about how comfortable people will be attending conventions and how annual indoor events will be altered permanently by the pandemic. ''Will they be as big?'' Mr. Steel asked. ''Will they be as well attended?''  Mr. Steel expects the level of activity at Javits to rebuild slowly into next year, with fewer events and lower attendance until 2022. ''In the short term, we are going to see a diminishment in the size of events,'' he said.  That will make it harder for the state to reap the benefits of its investment. The rationale for spending so much on Javits was the enhanced impact on the local and state economy from luring more conventioneers who would spend money on hotel rooms, restaurant meals and Broadway tickets.  The link between the convention center and the thousands of hotels in the city is symbiotic: The visitors patronize the hotels, and, for each night's stay, the state collects a fee of $1.50 that goes to the corporation that built Javits.  When tourism was booming before the pandemic, that formula paid off. The city's hotels sold more than 38 million nightly stays in 2019, when the city drew an all-time high of 66 million visitors.  But that number sank to 22 million last year, most of them arriving before the lockdown, according to NYC & Company, the city's tourism promotion agency.  Still, the expanded center was built to last more than 25 years, leaving ''plenty of time'' for the state to recoup what it has spent, Mr. Steel said.  The pandemic has cost the Javits about $200 million in lost revenue from canceled events, Mr. Steel said, and it was unclear if the operating corporation, which is meant to be self-sustaining, would need financial help from the state.  Once more travel restrictions, including from overseas and by some employers still barring workers from getting on planes, are lifted, Mr. Steel said, he expects the Javits's overhaul to attract groups -- especially gatherings of medical professionals -- that have bypassed the center in the past.  Some of those lucrative gatherings have not chosen New York because of the lack of a hotel next to the center, which sits on the Far West Side of Manhattan in an area that until recent years had been mostly industrial.  Mr. Cuomo recently announced that the state would seek bids for a lot just east of the convention center that could be developed into a hotel.  In the meantime, Mr. Steel and his staff are busy trying to coax more organizations into holding big gatherings at Javits so that it can play a leading role in the recovery of New York's economy.  They have at least one high-profile example to promote: Anthony Scaramucci, the financier who famously worked in the White House for President Trump for just 11 days, is moving his SALT conference from Las Vegas to Javits in September. The conference attracts about 2,000 hedge-fund managers and other investors and treats them to appearances by political leaders and celebrities.  Mr. Scaramucci was credited with helping Las Vegas bounce back from the Great Recession by holding his conference there in 2009. He said he would like to repeat that in New York.  ''Because of what's gone on in our home city, we thought it would be a really good opportunity to send the same message,'' Mr. Scaramucci said. ''We want to be one of the first people to put a flag in the ground and signal that it's OK to come back to the city.''  Working on escalators at the Javits Center expansion. The first in-person events are in late July. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRITTAINY NEWMAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004g "
422		"    Officer Attacked at Capitol Died of Strokes, Coroner Says  By Adam Goldman  1,107 words 20 April 2021   12     The determination is likely to complicate efforts to prosecute anyone in the death of the officer, Brian Sicknick.  WASHINGTON -- Officer Brian D. Sicknick of the U.S. Capitol Police had multiple strokes hours after sparring with a pro-Trump mob during the Jan. 6 riot and died of natural causes, Washington's medical examiner said on Monday.  The determination is likely to complicate the Justice Department's efforts to prosecute anyone in the death of Officer Sicknick, 42; two men have been charged with assaulting him by spraying an unknown chemical on him outside the Capitol.  But an autopsy found no evidence that Officer Sicknick had an allergic reaction to chemicals or any internal or external injuries, the medical examiner, Dr. Francisco J. Diaz, told The Washington Post, which first reported his finding.  Still, Dr. Diaz added of the riot, ''All that transpired played a role in his condition.'' His office said that it attributes death to natural causes when it can be ascribed to disease alone and that ''if death is hastened by an injury, the manner of death is not considered natural.''  Officer Sicknick was one of five people left dead after the attack. One rioter, Ashli Babbitt, was shot to death by another Capitol Police officer. Two others died of complications from heart disease and one death was accidental, Dr. Diaz has ruled.  Officer Sicknick died from ''acute brainstem and cerebellar infarcts due to basilar artery thrombosis,'' Dr. Diaz ruled, meaning a serious stroke. The artery that supplies the brainstem -- the master controller of the body's functions like breathing and heart rate -- was blocked by a clot, and the blood flow to the cerebellum at the back of the brain was blocked.  Strokes that involve the brainstem are devastating and usually fatal, said Dr. Lee Schwamm, a stroke expert at Harvard. They typically are caused by atherosclerosis in the artery that feeds the brainstem or by a big clot that originates in the heart and lodges in that artery.  Two men were charged last month with assaulting Officer Sicknick, but prosecutors have avoided linking the attack to his death. He was injured ''as a result of being sprayed in the face'' with an unidentified substance, according to court papers.  The Justice Department has accused the suspects, George Pierre Tanios, 39, of Morgantown, W.Va., and Julian Elie Khater, 32, of State College, Pa., of working together ''to assault law enforcement officers with an unknown chemical substance by spraying officers directly in the face and eyes.''  Mr. Tanios and Mr. Khater were charged with conspiracy to injure an officer, assaulting an officer with a dangerous weapon, civil disorder, obstruction of an official proceeding and other crimes related to violent conduct on the grounds of the Capitol.  The determination by Dr. Diaz is likely to be used by supporters of former President Donald J. Trump and others who have tried to downplay the storming of the Capitol.  About 140 police officers were assaulted during the riot, including about 80 from the Capitol Police and about 60 from Washington's Metropolitan Police Department, according to the Justice Department. Two other officers who tried to stop the siege later died by suicide.  More than 410 people have been arrested in at least 45 states.  In a statement released on Monday, the Capitol Police force said it accepted the medical examiner's findings but added, ''This does not change the fact Officer Sicknick died in the line of duty, courageously defending Congress and the Capitol.''  Officer Sicknick joined the department in July 2008 and most recently served in its first responder's unit, according to the force. He was an Air National Guard veteran who served in Saudi Arabia and Kyrgyzstan.  The Capitol Police had previously said in a statement that Officer Sicknick died from injuries suffered ''while physically engaging with protesters.''  The men sprayed Officer Sicknick and others minutes before the police line on the west side of the Capitol collapsed and rioters gained control over it, video obtained by The new_york_times has shown.  Officer Sicknick and two other police officers were injured and temporarily blinded ''as a result of being sprayed in the face'' with an unidentified substance by Mr. Khater and Mr. Tanios, according to the F.B.I.  The men were seen on video early in the afternoon of Jan. 6 standing several feet from police officers, including Officer Sicknick, the F.B.I. has said. In a video of the attack, Mr. Khater said ''give me that'' and reached into Mr. Tanios's backpack, the F.B.I. said. Mr. Tanios protested that it was too early, apparently to attack the officers with the spray. Mr. Khater countered that he had just been sprayed and held up a can of chemical spray.  The authorities have said that Officer Sicknick and two other officers, who were all standing near Mr. Khater, reacted to being sprayed in the face and were forced to back away.  After collapsing that night, Officer Sicknick was rushed to the hospital, where he later died. Investigators opened a homicide investigation immediately after his death with the hopes of determining if anyone who fought with him contributed to his death.  Officers have described the Jan. 6 events as ''medieval'' because of hand-to-hand combat and the use of blunt objects including baseball bats, flag poles and pipes as weapons.  The spray is extremely unlikely to have caused Officer Sicknick's strokes, Dr. Schwamm said. The most likely explanation, Dr. Schwamm said, was a terrible coincidence of timing when blood clots that occurred for other reasons arose when he was in a terrifying situation.  If Officer Sicknick's strokes had been caused by the attacks, the most likely explanation would be a tear in the artery that feeds the base of the brain. Clots can form when that happens and travel into a large artery that feeds the brain and block it.  Such cases are unusual, Dr. Schwamm said, but can occur when people violently twist and turn. A dissection would have been seen on an autopsy or imaging if the medical examiner looked at the entire vertebral artery, from its bottom at the back of the neck to where it enters the brain at the base of the skull.  Gina Kolata contributed reporting.  Gina Kolata contributed reporting.  A U.S. Capitol Police officer holding a program for the ceremony memorializing Officer Brian D. Sicknick in the Capitol Rotunda on Feb. 3. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Demetrius Freeman FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003u "
423		"    Focus Is on Video As Chauvin Trial Goes to the Jury  By Shaila Dewan, Tim Arango, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs and John Eligon  1,706 words 20 April 2021   1     The jury will be sequestered in a hotel during their deliberations over Derek Chauvin, who is charged with second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.  MINNEAPOLIS -- The two sides in one of the nation's most closely watched police brutality trials returned one last time to the graphic video of George Floyd's final moments on Monday, with the prosecution asking jurors to ''believe your eyes'' and the defense warning them not to be ''misled'' by a freeze-frame view.  After 14 days of testimony from policing experts, medical doctors, members of the Minneapolis Police Department and bystanders, lawyers made their closing arguments, urging the jurors to use common sense as the case was placed in their hands.  The prosecution focused on the nine minutes and 29 seconds that Derek Chauvin, the white police officer charged with murder, kept his knee on the neck of Mr. Floyd, a handcuffed Black man, on a Minneapolis street last Memorial Day.  ''This case is exactly what you thought when you saw it first, when you saw that video,'' Steve Schleicher, the prosecutor who delivered the closing argument, said. ''It's what you felt in your gut. It's what you now know in your heart.''  In a lengthy rebuttal, the defense emphasized the 17 minutes leading up to that time -- suggesting that Mr. Floyd had taken illicit drugs and had actively resisted when several officers tried to get him into a squad car. Mr. Chauvin's lawyer, Eric J. Nelson, repeatedly told jurors to look at the ''totality of the circumstances.''  ''Do not let yourselves be misled by a single still-frame image,'' Mr. Nelson told the jury, in response to the moment-by-moment analyses of video evidence presented by the prosecution. ''Put the evidence in its proper context.''  The closing arguments were held on the 18th floor of a government building surrounded by temporary fencing and military sentries. The high security could not keep out the tremors from last week's fatal police shooting of Daunte Wright just 10 miles away.  Gov. Tim Walz called for calm on Monday as the jury began deliberations. He declared a ''peacetime emergency'' to allow the police from neighboring states to be called in if necessary, joining more than 3,000 National Guard soldiers and airmen who have been deployed to assist local law enforcement.  ''Local and state resources have been fully deployed, but they are inadequate to address the threat,'' Mr. Walz said in an executive order.  Schools will move to remote learning later this week, and businesses have been boarded up because of the potential for unrest following a verdict.  The fatal shooting of Mr. Wright, a 20-year-old Black man, in a suburb called Brooklyn Center has cast a shadow over the proceedings.  After the jury left to begin deliberating, Mr. Nelson asked for a mistrial, saying that comments by Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California, amounted to threats and intimidation. While visiting Brooklyn Center, Ms. Waters told protesters that they should ''stay on the street'' and ''get more confrontational'' if Mr. Chauvin were acquitted.  Judge Peter A. Cahill denied the request but said, ''I'll give you that Congresswoman Waters may have given you something on appeal that may result in this whole trial being overturned.''  Judge Cahill served as a top deputy for Amy Klobuchar, a Democratic senator, when she was the county prosecutor, and was first appointed to the bench by a Republican governor, Tim Pawlenty. The judge has won re-election several times in nonpartisan races.  The trauma of Mr. Floyd's death, captured on video, became a clarion call for increased police accountability nationwide. At the same time, it was felt deeply and personally in Minneapolis, which still bears the scars of the rioting and arson that followed.  Inside the courtroom on Monday, lawyers made their final appeals to the jury of seven women and five men, who will be sequestered in a hotel for their deliberations.  Mr. Chauvin, 45, who spent 19 years as a Minneapolis police officer, was fired immediately after Mr. Floyd's death, along with three other officers involved. Mr. Chauvin is charged with second-degree murder, which carries a penalty of up to 40 years in prison, and the lesser charges of third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.  The three other officers are scheduled to be tried together in August.  In-person attendance has been strictly limited throughout the trial because of Covid-19, with one spectator seat reserved for each side. On Monday morning, Mr. Floyd's brother Philonise, who gave emotional testimony about his brother earlier in the trial, was in the Floyd family seat, later followed by a nephew, and an unidentified woman was in the Chauvin family seat.  Mr. Schleicher, speaking for the state, emphasized Mr. Floyd's humanity, saying that he had been compliant until he was forced to get into the squad car, and that he had pleaded for help, calling Mr. Chauvin ''Mister Officer.'' But, Mr. Schleicher said, Mister Officer did not help.  Speaking for less than two hours, Mr. Schleicher tried to tailor his appeal for those jurors who expressed favorable views of the police during the jury selection process. ''The defendant is on trial not for being a police officer -- it's not the state versus the police,'' Mr. Schleicher said. ''He's not on trial for who he was. He's on trial for what he did.''  He said that numerous witnesses said Mr. Chauvin had violated police training and policy when he pinned Mr. Floyd facedown and kept him pinned long after he lost consciousness.  ''This wasn't policing, this was murder,'' Mr. Schleicher said. ''The defendant is guilty of all three counts. All of them. And there's no excuse.''  The defense lawyer, Mr. Nelson, took a very different approach, covering a wide range of ground in a statement that took almost three hours, during which Mr. Chauvin removed his mask and paused the steady note-taking he had kept up throughout the trial.  Mr. Nelson showered jurors with what he said were discrepancies in the prosecution's case, hoping to plant a seed of reasonable doubt with at least one of the 12.  He argued that there were significant questions about at least two key issues: whether Mr. Chauvin's actions were allowed under Minneapolis Police Department policies and whether Mr. Chauvin had caused Mr. Floyd's death.  Mr. Nelson emphasized the many factors that ''a reasonable police officer'' must consider, including whether the subject is intoxicated, whether he is resisting and whether onlookers pose a threat. To illustrate the judgment calls involved, he said that each of the prosecution's many use-of-force experts had pinpointed a different moment at which Mr. Chauvin's use of force became unreasonable.  ''Officer Chauvin had no intent to purposefully use -- he did not purposefully use unlawful force,'' he said. ''These are officers doing their job in a highly stressful situation, according to their training, according to the policies of the Minneapolis Police Department. And it's tragic. It's tragic.''  He showed a video clip of the moment it appears that Mr. Floyd took his last breath, saying that at the same time, Mr. Chauvin was drawing his mace in response to the bystanders trying to intervene, and was startled by the approach of an emergency medical technician who happened upon the scene and offered to help.  While Mr. Nelson read from police policies warning that crowds were unpredictable, prosecutors referred to the bystanders as a ''bouquet of humanity'' and said fate had randomly selected them -- much the way the jurors were selected -- to witness what they called a ''shocking abuse of authority.''  One of the main questions for the jury to decide is whether Mr. Chauvin's actions were a ''substantial causal factor'' of Mr. Floyd's death.  ''The fact that other causes contribute to the death does not relieve the defendant of criminal liability,'' Judge Cahill told the jury.  Mr. Nelson barely mentioned the defense experts who testified, but he tried to exploit the fact that the prosecution called numerous medical experts, saying that there were discrepancies among their findings. He said that heart disease, hypertension and other pre-existing conditions, as well as Mr. Floyd's use of fentanyl and methamphetamine, were significant contributors to his death.  ''It is nonsense to suggest that none of these other factors had any role,'' he said. ''That is not reasonable.''  On rebuttal, Jerry W. Blackwell, speaking for the state, said Mr. Floyd had lived for 17,026 days without dying from his drug use or pre-existing conditions, which he represented as a field of blue dots with a yellow arrow pointing to the final one.  He sought to dispel confusion about the cause of death: ''You don't need a Ph.D., you don't need an M.D. to understand how fundamental breathing is to life.''  Mr. Blackwell said the notion that there were ''two sides to every story'' was ''one of the most dangerous things'' about the search for truth. ''If it is a story, that means there can be multiple sides to the story and there could never be a truth or reality,'' he said, ''except that what we're about here is getting to the truth, and not simply stories.''  Mr. Blackwell ended with a final attack on one of the defense's arguments about the cause of death, that Mr. Floyd had an enlarged heart.  ''You were told, for example, that Mr. Floyd died because his heart was too big,'' Mr. Blackwell said. ''And the truth of the matter is that the reason George Floyd is dead is because Mr. Chauvin's heart was too small.''  Marie Fazio and Andrés R. Martínez contributed reporting.  Marie Fazio and Andrés R. Martínez contributed reporting.  Closing arguments in the trial of the former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin were given in the Hennepin County Government Center on Monday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Victor J. Blue for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003m "
424		"    Cuomo Facing A State Inquiry Over His Book  By Jesse McKinley  1,237 words 20 April 2021   1     The New York governor, Andrew M. Cuomo, is now the subject of four separate investigations into his behavior in office.  ALBANY, N.Y. -- The New York State attorney general has opened an investigation into Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo's use of state resources as he wrote and promoted his recent pandemic memoir, the latest inquiry to engulf the embattled three-term Democrat.  The investigation followed disclosures that junior staff members and senior aides worked on Mr. Cuomo's book, ''American Crisis: Leadership Lessons from the Covid-19 Pandemic,'' including editing early drafts, sitting in on pitch meetings, and menial tasks like printing and delivering manuscript pages to the governor's mansion.  Mr. Cuomo has insisted that any work done by government employees on the book -- which garnered a seven-figure advance -- was voluntary, allowing that some minor work may have been ''incidental.''  The misuse of public resources has led to the downfall of numerous political figures, including a former state comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, who resigned and pleaded guilty to a felony in 2006 after he used a state driver to run errands for his wife.  The investigation was opened after Letitia James, the attorney general, received a formal referral letter from the state comptroller, Thomas P. DiNapoli, saying that a criminal investigation was warranted.  The new line of scrutiny seemed to exacerbate the widening rift among New York's leading Democrats, as Mr. Cuomo's office pushed back forcefully on Monday, describing the inquiry as a politically motivated attack -- by members of the governor's own party.  The governor's office suggested that Ms. James and Mr. DiNapoli, both Democrats, had acted to sabotage his political future in favor of their own.  ''We have officially jumped the shark -- the idea there was criminality involved here is patently absurd on its face and is just the furthering of a political pile-on,'' Richard Azzopardi, a senior adviser to Mr. Cuomo, said.  ''This is Albany politics at its worst,'' he continued. ''Both the comptroller and the attorney general have spoken to people about running for governor, and it is unethical to wield criminal referral authority to further political self-interestâ.''  The investigation deepens the legal and political woes confronting Mr. Cuomo, who has seen his once-soaring career hobbled as he faces separate scandals involving his personal behavior and professional conduct, including a federal investigation into his handling of the state's nursing homes during the pandemic.  That federal inquiry is one of four now facing Mr. Cuomo, including another overseen by Ms. James into multiple allegations of sexual harassment against the governor.  The State Assembly has opened a separate inquiry into those allegations, as well as the administration's withholding of a full account of the death toll among nursing home residents. The chair of the Assembly's Judiciary Committee, Charles D. Lavine, has said that investigators hired by his committee -- the private firm of Davis Polk -- would also examine the book deal and use of state resources.  The state's Public Officers Law, which governs ethics for elected officials and state employees, prohibits using ''property, services or other resources of the state for private business or other compensated nongovernmental purposes.''  The work on the book done by state employees was disclosed in The new_york_times in late March and subsequent reporting in other publications.  Ms. James received the referral letter from Mr. DiNapoli on April 13, suggesting that the inquiry would center on ''any indictable offense or offenses'' involving, but not limited to, ''the drafting, editing, sale and promotion of the governor's book and any related financial or business transactions.''  The formal referral -- which satisfies a technical prerequisite for the attorney general to begin a potential criminal inquiry -- gave Ms. James broad authority to prosecute ''any crime or offense arising out of such investigation.''  A spokeswoman for Ms. James confirmed on Monday that the office had received the referral, but declined additional comment on what she called ''an ongoing investigation.''  ''American Crisis,'' which was released by Crown Publishing Group in mid-October, just as a second wave of the coronavirus began to swell in New York, has seen its sales stall during the governor's political travails this year. Mr. Cuomo, 63, has declined to say how much he was paid for the manuscript, but people with knowledge of the book's bidding process said that at least one offer had topped $4 million.  Mr. Cuomo, whose previous memoir sold poorly when it was published in 2014, began writing ''American Crisis'' as early as mid-June, when the state's death toll was already in the tens of thousands.  The governor's work and pitching of the book also corresponded with a period in which his most senior aides were reshaping a report about nursing home deaths, omitting the full death toll in a way that might have insulated the governor from criticism on that issue.  The Cuomo administration has defended the editing of the July 6 report, contending that it was necessary to ensure accurate data, and not an attempt to hide the full death toll of nursing home residents, more than 15,000 of whom have died since the beginning of the pandemic.  New York remains one of the hardest-hit states in the nation, with more than 51,000 Covid-related deaths reported so far.  Mr. Cuomo, once hailed as a steady presence during a series of daily news conferences about the pandemic, has become increasingly isolated as the overlapping controversies have sandbagged his administration.  A poll from Siena College on Monday found that the number of voters with a favorable view of the governor had dropped to 40 percent, a 16-point decline from February and the lowest mark of his decade-long tenure. But 51 percent also said the governor should not ''immediately resign,'' consistent with prior polls, with 37 percent saying he should.  There were also indications that Mr. Cuomo's prospects for a fourth term were in jeopardy. Just 33 percent of those polled said they would vote to re-elect him in 2022; 57 said they would ''prefer someone else.''  Most of the state's congressional delegation, and many of his fellow Democrats in Albany, including Mr. DiNapoli, have called on Mr. Cuomo to resign. He has steadfastly resisted, pleading for time until Ms. James's investigation into the sexual harassment allegations is complete.  Indeed, his intraparty attack on Ms. James and Mr. DiNapoli leaves little doubt that Mr. Cuomo will continue to fight any efforts to force him from office. The State Senate leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, has called for his resignation, but Carl E. Heastie, the Bronx assemblyman who leads the State Assembly, has stopped short of that demand. Both are Democrats.  Asked about the book at an online news conference on Monday, the governor reiterated that some members of his staff had volunteered to work on the book, and that some were also asked to review passages that mentioned them.  Mr. Cuomo also seemed determined to concentrate on his job, despite the distractions of various investigations.  ''For me, in life it's not what you say,'' he said. ''It's what you do.''  Danny Hakim contributed reporting.  Gov. Andrew Cuomo often dictated passages into a cellphone, and staff members later edited them. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHANNON STAPLETON/REUTERS) (A22)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004d "
425		"    Union Square's Climate Clock Is Ticking With Good News  By Colin Moynihan  613 words 20 April 2021   6     The display in New York's Union Square, which reports the window to address global warming, now also measures the rising use of renewable energy.  A hint of optimism has been added to the Climate Clock, the set of decreasing numbers on the facade of a building in New York's Union Square that was conceived by two artists and activists, to communicate the urgency of curbing carbon emissions.  Seven months ago, the artists Andrew Boyd and Gan Golan, assisted by others, redid ''Metronome,'' a public art project commissioned by the developers of One Union Square South and unveiled in 1999: Its clock, instead of measuring the time of day, would measure the time remaining, by some counts, to reduce emissions and prevent some effects of global warming from becoming irreversible. (About seven years, the clock's creators said.)  Now, though, a group of people working on the Climate Clock project have decided to offer a note of hope by adding to the display a second set of numbers that represents the increasing percentage of the world's energy that comes from sources like the sun and wind.  So on Sunday afternoon, a participant in the project, Greg Schwedock, entered One Union Square South, ascended several flights, walked into a small closet-like room and then squeezed through a low two-foot-by-four-foot opening in a wall, emerging into a dusty cinder block chamber directly behind the digital display of ''Metronome.''  Communicating by Zoom with the Climate Clock's chief technical officer, Adrian Carpenter, Schwedock made some adjustments to an electronic panel.  Then, at 4:26, he flipped a switch and a new message appeared on the display outside: ''The Earth has a deadline. Let's make it a lifeline.'' It was followed by a 10-digit display that reports the amount of the world's energy that comes from renewable sources. It's going up, but slowly. As of Sunday afternoon, the clock was reporting the figure as just over 12 percent.  Laura Berry, lead researcher for the Climate Clock, said that the renewable energy number on the ''Metronome'' display was based on information from the Our World in Data project, directed by Max Roser of Oxford University.  The numbers designed to measure the crucial window to cut emissions remain on the clock, but will alternate with the renewable energy numbers.  The adjustment to the clock display was timed to precede Earth Day, which is on Thursday, and coincide with several environmental rallies and events planned for New York, Washington and Glasgow, where the U.N. Climate Change Conference will be held in November.  The Climate Clock was inspired in part by the Doomsday Clock, maintained online by the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, and by the National Debt Clock near Bryant Park in Manhattan.  Boyd and Golan believed ''Metronome,'' with its existing electronic display and facing a highly trafficked public area, seemed like the perfect spot for an ecological message. Andrew Ginzel and Kristin Jones, the creators of ''Metronome,'' agreed and so did the management of One Union Square South.  Schwedock said that, although he still regards the climate to be in a state of emergency, he was happy to help bring the renewable energy numbers to the attention of the public.  ''It's nice to have positive climate news,'' he said. ''That's something that the environmental community can be proud of.''  The Climate Clock now displays an estimated percentage of the world's energy now being supplied by renewable sources. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003q "
426		"    A Giant Leap for a Tiny Helicopter With the First Flight on Mars  By Kenneth Chang  1,603 words 20 April 2021   13     The brief test of the experimental vehicle called Ingenuity shows how explorers can study the red planet from the sky as well as the ground.  A small robotic helicopter named Ingenuity made space exploration history on Monday when it lifted off the surface of Mars and hovered in the wispy air of the red planet. It was the first machine from Earth ever to fly like an airplane or a helicopter on another world.  The achievement extends NASA's long, exceptional record of firsts on Mars.  ''We together flew at Mars,'' MiMi Aung, the project manager for Ingenuity, said to her team during the celebration. ''And we together now have this Wright brothers moment.''  Like the first flight of an airplane by Wilbur and Orville Wright in 1903, the flight did not go far or last long, but it showed what could be done. Flying in the thin atmosphere of Mars was a particularly tricky technical endeavor, on the edge of impossible because there is almost no air to push against. NASA engineers employed ultralight materials, fast-spinning blades and high-powered computer processing to get Ingenuity off the ground and keep it from veering off and crashing.  And just as the Wright plane led to a transformation in how people and goods zip around Earth, Ingenuity offers a new mode of transportation that NASA can now use as it studies the solar system's mysteries. Future robotic explorers, with this technology under the agency's belt may take new, unconventional shapes.  ''What the ingenuity team has done,'' said Michael Watkins, the director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory where the helicopter was built, during a news conference, ''is given us the third dimension. They freed us from the surface now and forever in planetary exploration.''  Ingenuity was also something different for NASA -- a high-risk, high-reward project with a modest price tag where failure was an acceptable outcome.  That approach is more similar to that of nimble space companies like SpaceX than large traditional development programs that work through every possible contingency to build a full-scale machine that has to work the first time.  Ingenuity was thus a small experiment tacked onto NASA's Mars rover, Perseverance but it has the potential for a paradigm-breaking advance.  Perhaps a more advanced helicopter could serve as a scout for a future rover, identifying intriguing locations for closer study and safe routes for the rover to drive there. Or swarms of helicopters could zip up and down cliff faces to examine layers of rock that are too far away or out of view of current spacecraft.  There are no current plans to put a second helicopter on Mars. But Bob Balaram, the chief engineer of Ingenuity, said he and colleagues had begun sketching out designs for a larger Mars helicopter with about 10 times the mass and capable of carrying some 10 pounds of science equipment.  ''That would be, I think, the good sweet spot for the next-generation design,'' Dr. Balaram said.  On Sunday, mission controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California radioed the commands for the test to Perseverance, which landed on Mars in February. Perseverance in turn relayed the commands to Ingenuity, which was sitting 200 feet away on flat terrain that was chosen to serve as the airstrip for a series of five test flights.  At 3:34 a.m. Eastern time -- it was the middle of the Martian day, half an hour past noon, the helicopter spun up its rotors as it had been commanded and rose above Jezero crater, into the Martian sky.  At the surface of Mars, the atmosphere is just 1/100th as dense as Earth's, not much for helicopter blades to push against. Thus, to generate enough lift for the four-pound Ingenuity to rise up, its two rotors, each about four feet wide, had to spin in opposite directions at more than 2,500 revolutions a minute.  It hovered at a height of some 10 feet for about 30 seconds. Then it descended back to the surface.  But at that moment, no one on Earth -- including people at NASA -- knew what was actually happening. The two spacecraft were not in communication with Earth during the test, and Ingenuity had to perform all of its actions autonomously.  It was only three hours later that one of NASA's other Mars spacecraft, the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, passed overhead, and Perseverance could relay the test data back to Earth.  Minutes later, engineers analyzed the results that showed a successful flight.  Havard Grip, the engineer who serves as NASA's chief pilot for Ingenuity, announced as the data arrived that the helicopter had completed ''the first powered flight of a powered aircraft on another planet.''  NASA officials said they have named the airstrip where Ingenuity took off and landed Wright Brothers Field. A small piece of fabric from the original Wright airplane was glued to Ingenuity and sent to Mars.  Ms. Aung told her team to celebrate the moment, ''and then after that, let's get back to work and more flights,'' she said.  With the first trip's success, up to four more flights could be attempted. The first three, including Monday's, are designed to test basic abilities of the helicopter. The second, which could occur as soon as Thursday, is to rise to an altitude of 16 feet and then travel horizontally about 50 feet before returning to its original location.  The third flight could fly a distance of 160 feet and then return. Mr. Grip said the team had not decided on plans for the final two flights. ''What we're talking about here is going higher, going further, going faster, stretching the capabilities of the helicopter in those ways,'' he said.  Ms. Aung said she thought Ingenuity would squeeze in the remaining four flights over the next two weeks. She also wanted to push Ingenuity to its limits and for the last flight to travel 600 or 700 meters -- or up to 2,300 feet.  ''I'm being more cautious here,'' Dr. Grip responded, a bit hesitantly.  NASA plans to wrap up the tests within 30 Martian days of when Ingenuity was dropped off on April 3 so that Perseverance can commence the main portion of its $2.7 billion mission. Ingenuity was an $85 million nice-to-have, add-on project, but not a core requirement for the success of Perseverance.  The looser requirements of a technology demonstration allowed the engineers to use an almost off-the-shelf Qualcomm processor that was originally developed for cellphones with more computing power than all previous interplanetary spacecraft combined.  The processor, which was not adapted for the harsh conditions of space, was more susceptible to disruptions of radiation, but the helicopter needed all of that number-crunching speed to maintain steady flight.  The little machine, which traveled to Mars tucked on the underside of Perseverance, has also captured the imaginations of many.  Just before Perseverance launched to Mars in June last year, Jim Bridenstine, the NASA administrator at the time, said, ''I'll tell you, the thing that has me the most excited as an NASA administrator is getting ready to watch a helicopter fly on another world.''  John P. Grotzinger, a professor of geology at the California Institute of Technology and formerly project scientist for Curiosity, an earlier Mars rover that arrived in 2012, said he was also a fan of Ingenuity.  ''This is a really viable way to go about exploring the planet because you can cover so much area,'' Dr. Grotzinger said.  A helicopter, especially one flying in the thin air of Mars, could carry only a limited number of sensors, and it would not be able to see things as detailed as a rover, which can move a robotic arm and press instruments right against a rock.  ''But the trade-off gives us access to a different part of understanding Mars,'' Dr. Grotzinger said.  Once the demonstrations are over, Perseverance will leave the helicopter behind and head toward a river delta along the rim of Jezero crater where sediments, and perhaps chemical hints of ancient life, are preserved.  Scientists and engineers are getting their instruments on Perseverance ready to start collecting data.  That includes a laser that has begun vaporizing nearby rocks and soil to analyze their chemical composition and an experiment that is designed to break apart carbon dioxide to generate oxygen. That technology will be key for providing astronauts air to breathe when they eventually step foot on Mars.  In addition to Perseverance, two other new visitors also arrived at the red planet from Earth this year.  China's Tianwen-1 probe entered orbit in February. As early as late May, it will release a lander and rover that will try to reach the surface of the red planet. If it succeeds, it will be China's first successful touchdown on another planet -- it has landed on the moon three times already.  The United Arab Emirates's Hope probe also arrived at Mars two months ago. After a firing of its thrusters on March 29, it has entered into an orbit where it can begin a close study of the planet's atmosphere and weather. That phase of scientific research was scheduled to begin last Wednesday.  In these images from NASA, Ingenuity hovered, left, about 10 feet above the Mars surface for about 30 seconds; then it landed, right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NASA, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00048 "
427		"    A Tangle of Emotions With a Lifelong Grip  By Dwight Garner  1,160 words 20 April 2021   1     Cynthia Ozick's new novella, ''Antiquities,'' is set in Westchester County, New York, in 1949 and 1950. It's about seven semi-distinguished old men: Waspy geezers, with walkers and heart conditions, the last living trustees of a patrician boys' academy that closed more than three decades earlier. They live on the splendid property, their number dwindling, and they bicker like sunburned children.  This is a premise that, as A.J. Liebling was wont to say, stretches the elastic of credulity. These are men of means, former lawyers and businessmen, some with families. What are they doing here? What's their monkish loyalty to this place?  The hothouse seclusion to which Ozick consigns them reminded me of the absurd premises of two of Donald Antrim's brainy, surreal novels, ''The Hundred Brothers'' (1997) and ''The Verificationist'' (2000).  Each of those novels by Antrim is about crushing odd souls together. In the first, 100 brothers, of the same parents, gather in their family's dilapidated library for a splendidly disputatious meal. In the second, a big group of psychotherapists have a tetchy nightlong dinner in a pancake house. One of them floats up to the ceiling, lost in a sticky, thumb-sucking flow of maple syrup and remembrance.  Ozick's novella is not so unearthly, so giddily strange. But she introduces a second implausibility to the group's living situation. The trustees have assigned themselves a literary task. Each is to compose a short memoir, fewer than 10 pages, about their time as students at the academy.  This is not a free-form assignment. The rules are finicky. Each essay must a) ''be confined to an explicit happening lingering in memory and mood''; b) ''concern childhood only, and nothing beyond''; and c) ''reflect accurately the atmosphere and principles of the academy at the time in which the incident to be recounted had occurred.'' Because the trustees are old and lazy and prone to long afternoon naps, the deadline is tight.  These fellows are going to let fly, one last time, before their probable rendezvous with mnemonic erosion. One way to read ''Antiquities,'' then, is as a (pretty funny) book about literary infighting and resentment.  Anyone who has followed Ozick's career knows she's a delight on these topics. Her long story ''Envy; or, Yiddish in America,'' for example, which appeared in her 1971 collection ''The Pagan Rabbi,'' is a masterpiece of pique. The poet Edelshtein seethes; he thinks he could be as famous as Ostrover, his nemesis, if only he too had a translator.  Ostrover gives witty readings that infuriate Edelshtein. Asked onstage if he follows Jewish dietary laws, Ostrover replies: ''I was heartbroken to learn that the minute an oyster enters my stomach, he becomes an anti-Semite. A bowl of shrimp once started a pogrom against my intestines.'' Some readers might forget that Ozick, who just turned 93, has a darting, impudent wit; ''Antiquities'' is a reminder.  This new book -- it is richly patterned and strongly colored -- is a relatively small addition to a distinctive body of work, composed across seven decades, that includes novels (''Trust,'' ''The Messiah of Stockholm,'' ''The Puttermesser Papers''), books of short stories (''The Shawl'') and many volumes of literary criticism, nearly all of which are steeped in an ardent awareness of Jewish cultural inheritance but grounded in universal human quiddities.  ''Antiquities'' is a small addition, but it's a real one. The narrator -- we are privy to his journal -- is Lloyd Wilkinson Petrie. He's a retired lawyer and a lonely trustee; there is something about him that sets him apart, that others like to mock.  When he attended the school, he was slight and sickly; he preferred the indoors to the out, chess to football. He was a walking embodiment of Samuel Johnson's dictum that placing a shy boy at a private school is akin to ''forcing an owl upon day.''  Lloyd went on to edit the Yale Law Journal and have a seemingly reputable career. But he's pierced by an ingrained sense of alienation. When he manages to push it out a door, it returns through a window.  We learn about his lackluster marriage, and about his son, an embarrassment to him, who is trying to make a go of it in Hollywood. (About scripts, Lloyd sniffs: ''Can a treatment, so called, be said to possess literary cachet?'') Lloyd is reeling, too, from the death of his longtime secretary, the younger Miss Margaret Stimmer, who in an unacknowledged way was the love of his life.  This novella's heart lies in the story Lloyd is trying to relate in his essay about the academy, a story that keeps him banging away on his Remington typewriter late into the night, antagonizing the other trustees.  The essay is about his friendship with a boy named Ben-Zion Elefantin, and about the casual but intense anti-Semitism at the academy during his time there. Ben-Zion is from Egypt's Elephantine island, and this fact allows Ozick to examine some of that island's complicated Jewish history.  The worldly and well-traveled Ben-Zion is scorned at the school, and Lloyd's friendship with him -- they bond over chess -- renders Lloyd an outcast too. He can't quite comprehend his lost status. ''I was, after all, a Petrie, and a Petrie by nature belongs to the mockers, not to the mocked.''  These boys are young; Ben-Zion is 11 and Lloyd only 10. But their friendship comes to have an erotic element. The tangle of emotions Lloyd felt has haunted him for life.  Lloyd works out these feelings at regular lunches, at the Oyster Bar in Grand Central Station, with a Jewish friend who was also a student at the academy at the time. ''I was suffering all those years at school, Lloyd, and it's not something a person forgets,'' the friend says. ''You never went out of your way to do me harm.''  ''Antiquities'' has a fable-like aspect. Lloyd, in his recollections, begins to wonder if Ben-Zion might have been a delusion of sorts. But Ozick grounds her book in the stuff of real life.  The tone is tragicomic. In one memorable scene, Lloyd discovers that his beloved typewriter has been vandalized. A few days later he peers down from his window into the yard and sees the other trustees looking up, jeering at him.  The likely vandal steps forward with his walker, ''as if about to wave in ill-intended greeting.'' As he does, he trips on a branch and takes a nasty spill. Within days, he's dead. Spite and malice. In literature and in life, they're the silent killers.  Follow Dwight Garner on Twitter: @DwightGarner. Antiquities By Cynthia Ozick 179 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.  (C1);  (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRED R. CONRAD/THE new_york_times/REDUX) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003l "
428		"    Zoning Is a Social Justice Matter  By Richard D. Kahlenberg  1,880 words 20 April 2021   25     If you care about social justice, you have to care about zoning.  Housing segregation by race and class is a fountainhead of inequality in America, yet for generations, politicians have been terrified to address the issue. That is why it is so significant that President Biden has proposed, as part of his American Jobs Act, a $5 billion race-to-the-top competitive grants program to spur jurisdictions to ''eliminate exclusionary zoning and harmful land use policies.''  Mr. Biden would reward localities that voluntarily agree to jettison ''minimum lot sizes, mandatory parking requirements and prohibitions on multifamily housing.'' The Biden administration is off to an important start, but over the course of his term, Mr. Biden should add sticks to the carrots he has already proposed.  Although zoning may seem like a technical, bureaucratic and decidedly local question, in reality the issue relates directly to three grand themes that Joe Biden ran on in the 2020 campaign: racial justice, respect for working-class people and national unity. Perhaps no single step would do more to advance those goals than tearing down the government-sponsored walls that keep Americans of different races and classes from living in the same communities, sharing the same public schools and getting a chance to know one another across racial, economic and political lines.  Economically discriminatory zoning policies -- which say that you are not welcome in a community unless you can afford a single-family home, sometimes on a large plot of land -- are not part of a distant, disgraceful past. In most American cities, zoning laws prohibit the construction of relatively affordable homes -- duplexes, triplexes, quads and larger multifamily units -- on three-quarters of residential land.  In the 2020 race, Mr. Biden said he was running to ''restore the soul of our nation,'' which had been damaged by President Donald Trump's embrace of racism. Removing exclusionary barriers that keep millions of Black and Hispanic people out of safe neighborhoods with strong schools is central to the goal of advancing racial justice. Over the past several decades, as the sociologist Orlando Patterson has noted, Black people have been integrated into the nation's political life and the military, ''but the civil-rights movement failed to integrate Black Americans into the private domain of American life.''  Single-family exclusive zoning, which was adopted by communities shortly after the Supreme Court struck down explicit racial zoning in 1917, is what activists call the ''new redlining.'' Racial discrimination has created an enormous wealth gap between white and Black people, and single-family-only zoning perpetuates that inequality.  While exclusionary zoning laws are especially harmful to Black people, the discrimination is more broadly rooted in class snobbery -- a second problem Mr. Biden highlighted in his campaign. As a proud product of Scranton, Pa., Mr. Biden said he would value the dignity of working people and not look down on anyone. The elitism Mr. Biden promised to reject helps explain why in virtually all-white communities like La Crosse, Wis., efforts to remedy economic segregation have received strong pushback from upper-income whites, and why middle-class Black communities have sometimes shown fierce resistance to low-income housing.  If race were the only factor driving exclusionary zoning, one would expect to see such policies most extensively promoted in communities where racial intolerance is highest, but in fact the most restrictive zoning is found in politically liberal cities, where racial views are more progressive. As Harvard's Michael Sandel has noted, social psychologists have found that highly-educated elites ''may denounce racism and sexism but are unapologetic about their negative attitudes toward the less educated.'' Class discrimination helps explain why, despite a 25 percent decline in Black-white residential segregation since 1970, income segregation has more than doubled.  By addressing a problem common to America's multiracial working class, reducing exclusionary barriers could also help promote Mr. Biden's third big goal: national unity. Today, no two groups are more politically divided from each other than working-class whites and working-class people of color. For centuries, going back to Bacon's Rebellion in 1676, right-wing politicians have successfully pitted these two groups against each other, but every once in a while, America breaks free of this grip, and lower-income and working-class people of all races come together and engage in what the Rev. William Barber II calls ''fusion politics.''  It happened in 1968, when Mr. Biden's hero Robert Kennedy brought together working-class Black, Latino and white constituencies in a presidential campaign that championed a liberalism without elitism and a populism without racism. It happened again in 1997 and 2009 in Texas, when Republican legislators representing white working-class voters and Democrats representing Black and Hispanic constituencies came together to support (and then to defend) the Texas top 10 percent plan to admit the strongest students in every high school to the University of Texas at Austin, despite the opposition of legislators representing wealthy white suburban districts that had dominated admissions for decades. And a similar coalition appears to be coming together in California, over the issue of exclusionary zoning. State Senator Scott Wiener, who has been trying to legalize multifamily living spaces, told me that Republican and Democratic legislators representing working-class communities have supported reform, while the opponents have one thing in common: They represent wealthier constituents who ''wanted to keep certain people out of their community.''  Taking on exclusionary zoning also begins to address two other challenges the Biden administration has identified: the housing affordability crisis and climate change. Economists from across the political spectrum agree that zoning laws that ban anything but single-family homes artificially drive up prices by limiting the supply of housing that can be built in a region. At a time when the Covid-19 pandemic has left many Americans jobless and people are struggling to make rent or pay their mortgages, it is incomprehensible that ubiquitous government zoning policies would be permitted to make the housing affordability crisis worse by driving prices unnaturally higher.  Likewise, there is widespread agreement that laws banning the construction of multifamily housing promote damage to the planet. Single-family-exclusive zoning pushes new development further and further out from central cities, which lengthens commutes and increases the emissions of greenhouse gases. This is an especially big problem for employees who cannot work remotely at a computer. Families should always have the freedom to make personal choices about their living arrangements, but as the planet heats up, it is bizarre that government would explicitly prohibit construction of the most environmentally friendly options.  It is clear that the federal government has the authority to act on this issue. While zoning laws are locally constructed, the federal government has long cited its powers to regulate interstate commerce as a rationale for pursuing important aims: combating racial discrimination in zoning, protecting religious institutions from discriminatory zoning and overriding zoning laws to site cellphone towers.  Enactment of Mr. Biden's proposal for federal grants to encourage local reforms would be an important first step and could provide a significant incentive for change, just as President Barack Obama's race-to-the-top program for education helped alter state and local behavior toward charter schools. But there are many other additional opportunities Mr. Biden should explore.  In December 2020, the Century Foundation, where I work, assembled more than 20 of the nation's leading thinkers on housing over Zoom -- elected officials, civil rights activists, libertarians and researchers -- to discuss eight possible options. The alternatives included reinstating and strengthening the Obama administration's 2015 Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule that requires local governments to begin taking steps to dismantle segregation, as well as Mr. Obama's 2013 guidance making clear that unjustified policies that have a racially discriminatory ''disparate impact'' are illegal even absent discriminatory intent. Another set of policies would require states, cities and counties receiving existing federal funding for public infrastructure and housing to develop strategies to reduce exclusionary zoning.  But Mr. Biden should go even further and create what is known as a private right of action -- comparable to the one found in the 1968 Fair Housing Act -- to allow victims of economically discriminatory government zoning policies to sue in federal court, just as victims of racial discrimination currently can. This Economic Fair Housing Act, which I have proposed and the Equitable Housing Institute has developed into statutory language, makes clear that state-sponsored economic discrimination is wrong, whether or not it has a racially disparate impact. And because it is wrong, the law should apply in every town and state in the country -- not just those that want to participate in the new federal funding programs Mr. Biden's proposal would provide.  For important historical reasons, being a class snob is not held in the same disrepute as being a racist. But in the context of exclusionary zoning laws, the message of the racist and the class snob is cut from the same cloth: Black families and working-class families are so degraded that the state should sponsor laws to make it illegal for anyone to build the types of housing they can afford. As we begin to come out of a pandemic in which grocery clerks, health care workers and truck drivers were recognized as everyday heroes, government discrimination against them must end.  Blue cities and states -- most notably Minneapolis and Oregon -- have recently led the way on eliminating single-family exclusive zoning, as a matter of racial justice, housing affordability and environmental protection. But conservatives often support this type of reform as well, because they don't want government micromanaging what people can do on their own land. At the national level, some conservatives have joined liberals in championing reforms like the Yes in My Backyard Act, which seeks to discourage exclusionary zoning.  While democratic egalitarianism and the liberty to be free from government interference are values that are typically in tension with each other, in the case of exclusionary zoning reform, they point in the same direction. Perhaps for that reason, surveys suggest it is popular. In a 2019 Data for Progress poll, for example, voters were asked, ''Would you support or oppose a policy to ensure smaller, lower-cost homes like duplexes, townhouses and garden apartments can be built in middle- and upper-class neighborhoods?'' Supporters outnumbered opponents two to one. After decades of federal inaction on this issue, Congress must move boldly to embrace the country's anti-racist and anti-elitist mood to remove state-sponsored barriers that divide the nation's people.  Richard D. Kahlenberg (@RickKahlenberg) is a senior fellow at the Century Foundation and the author of ''Tearing Down the Walls: How the Biden Administration and Congress Can Reduce Exclusionary Zoning,'' from which this essay is adapted.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BETTMANN / GETTY IMAGES AND ABSTRACT AERIAL ART / GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00044 "
429		"    Patrick Marleau Breaks Gordie Howe's N.H.L. Record for Games Played  By Andrew Knoll  1,458 words 20 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     Marleau passed the mark Howe set when he retired at age 52 in 1980, taking the ice for the 1,768th time.  Patrick Marleau of the San Jose Sharks skated on N.H.L. ice for the 1,768th time on Monday, setting the league's record for the most games played. Marleau passed Gordie Howe, the six-time scoring leader and most valuable player known as ''Mr. Hockey.''  Marleau started the game against the Golden Knights and after its first whistle, the match was halted to honor him with an announcement, a video montage, a message from N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman and a lengthy applause he saluted the crowd in Las Vegas by raising his stick. The Sharks wore jersey patches with Marleau's uniform No. 12, and goalie Martin Jones had a custom mask for the occasion.  Marleau played 17:21 and recorded a shot on goal in a 3-2 shootout loss. After the game, the Golden Knights lined up and shook hands with Marleau, the sort of reverence typically reserved for the end of a playoff series.  ''I didn't know what they had planned or anything like that but it was super special to see all the things that they did,'' Marleau said after the game. ''I know there was a lot of work throughout the organization, through the trainers, to make this happen. We saw all the patches, the T-shirts, the sweaters, they didn't miss a thing.''  Before the game, he said he wanted to make sure he thanked everyone who had been part of the journey.  ''You don't get this far without help and support, and I'm very grateful for all that.''  Howe initially set the record in 1961. The most recent player in the four major North American professional sports leagues to set a record for games played had been the N.F.L. kicker Morten Andersen in 2004.  Marleau, 41, has not missed a game since the 2008-9 season and has played in more than 98 percent of the possible games over 23 seasons with San Jose, Toronto and Pittsburgh. To put his feat in perspective, the N.H.L. will welcome its 32nd franchise in the 2021-22 season, the Seattle Kraken. They will not play their 1,768th game until 2043.  Since Marleau debuted in 1997, the league has changed rules and canceled a season because of a labor dispute, and the style of play has changed.  ''The game when he started was completely different than the game he's playing now,'' said Los Angeles Kings Coach Todd McLellan, who coached Marleau for seven seasons with San Jose. ''Just think of the number of lockouts, the number of rule changes, the type of body contact, the fighting that has disappeared, the intimidation factor, the type of refereeing that we saw back then to what we see today, technology, coaching, goaltenders, size of equipment.''  He continued: ''If he started a journal from Day 1 until now, I'd be the first guy to read it, because he would be able to tell a long story about a great game that's changed over decades.''  That story would include Marleau's well-decorated trophy case. He has won gold medals twice at the Olympics and once at the World Championships and the World Cup of Hockey. He ranks 23rd on the N.H.L.'s career goals list with 566 and sixth in game-winning goals in the regular season and playoffs.  But he is missing the N.H.L.'s ultimate prize. Before beating Howe's record, Marleau had already accomplished another feat of longevity, albeit an ignominious one, having played the most games without winning the Stanley Cup.  Marleau has played in four conference finals and one Stanley Cup finals series, the Sharks' loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins in 2016. The Sharks entered Monday's game needing a serious run to reach similar heights, 5 points out of a playoff spot with 12 games remaining, but an elusive Cup still drives Marleau's passion.  ''I want to be looked upon when I'm gone that I gave it my all, enjoyed the game, loved the game, loved being around the team and loved winning games,'' Marleau said. ''Those are the biggest things, obviously if I can add a Stanley Cup win before I retire then that would be ideal for me. But just having the right characteristics being a great teammate and a great player, that's kind of what I would like to be known for.''  Late in his career, Marleau has become a sort of liaison between his coaches and the youngest players on the team, putting into practice the early tutelage he received from Sharks veterans, particularly goalie Kelly Hrudey.  Peter DeBoer, who succeeded McLellan in San Jose and coached the Sharks to the finals, first encountered Marleau while coaching Canada's under-17 national team. DeBoer, who now coaches Vegas, said even then teammates were drawn to Marleau's confident but unassuming demeanor.  Marleau's path is simultaneously classic and modern, going from a farm in Western Canada to a player who honed his conditioning, injury prevention and anti-aging routines over time and adapted his game as the sport evolved.  ''What Patrick has and is maybe missing from today's generation is that he's farm tough. He's a big, thick, strong Saskatchewan farm boy,'' said McLellan, who is also from the province. ''That's what he started out as, and then he was committed to training and to his fitness.''  Of the more than 8,000 players who have played in the N.H.L. across its history, the two most durable were both from Saskatchewan.  The two had a meeting at the 2009 All-Star Game in Montreal, when Marleau and his oldest son were playing with mini-sticks in an arena hallway. Howe grabbed a stick from Marleau's hand and began playing with his son, in a moment Marleau said was etched into his memory.  But only Howe has played in five different decades. His career began in 1946 and appeared to end in the early 1970s as the toll of so many games manifested in the form of arthritis and other injuries.  After two seasons away, Howe returned to the ice in 1973 to play with his sons -- Mark and Marty -- and logged another 419 games in the World Hockey Association with the Houston Aeros and the New England Whalers.  The leagues eventually merged, and Howe played another N.H.L. campaign with the Whalers in the 1979-80 season. Marleau would need to play roughly five more seasons of the usual 82 games to eclipse Howe's professional total.  Mark Howe said that his father, who died in 2016, would be enthused to see Marleau break his record, and that he held fellow competitors in high regard.  ''The knitting that unites guys who play so long is called passion,'' said Mark Howe, a Hall of Famer himself. ''He's got good size and he's a powerful skater. He scored a lot of goals, big goals, over the years when the Sharks were at their peak.''  During the first and longest of Marleau's three stints in San Jose, from 1997 to 2017, he helped the team make 17 playoff appearances. He left for Toronto, but the Sharks wanted to keep him so much that the star center Joe Thornton was willing to take a lower salary for the team to accommodate Marleau.  McLellan once said that Thornton was ''cut from the old cloth'' and described Marleau similarly, saying that Marleau offered a connection to hockey's past. He, Thornton and Washington Capitals defenseman Zdeno Chara are the only remaining players drafted in the 1990s.  Even after setting the career record, Marleau can still achieve another mark of longevity.  If Marleau plays another full season next year, he would surpass Doug Jarvis's record of 964 straight games, though he would have to contend with Florida Panthers defenseman Keith Yandle, whose 912 games is the only active streak longer than his.  And there's of course still the pursuit of a Stanley Cup.  ''As long as my family is willing to keep supporting me, seeing me off on road trips and welcoming me home coming back,'' Marleau said, ''we'll try to keep it going as long as we can.''  Sharks forward Patrick Marleau acknowledged the crowd during a stop in play to celebrate his games played record. (PHOTOGRAPH BY John Locher/Associated Press FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00054 "
430		"    'Red Flag' Law And Red Tape In Indianapolis  By Campbell Robertson  1,687 words 20 April 2021   1     Citing shortcomings of the state's ''red flag'' law, the local prosecutor explained why he did not seek a ruling last year that would have barred Brandon Hole from possessing guns.  INDIANAPOLIS -- The senior county prosecutor in Indianapolis said on Monday that his office never sought to invoke a law that could have prevented Brandon Hole from buying two firearms before he shot and killed eight people last week at a FedEx packaging warehouse.  In a news conference, Ryan Mears, the prosecutor for Marion County, said his office had decided not to use Indiana's so-called red flag law last year, even though Mr. Hole's mother's warnings about her son's mental instability had prompted the police to seize a shotgun from him.  The tight deadlines and constraints on evidence gathering built into the state's 16-year-old statute gave prosecutors too little time to make a convincing case to a judge, Mr. Mears said, adding that losing in court could have backfired.  ''If we move forward with that proceeding, and we lose, guess what happens: that firearm goes right back to that person,'' he said. ''We weren't willing to take that.''  The tragedy of last week's mass shooting, and the questions about missed opportunities in the months that led up to it, has highlighted some shortcomings in the red flag laws, adopted in more than a dozen states, that have been one of the few gun control measures both political parties have been able to agree to.  Under such laws, the authorities can take guns from people who are deemed by a judge to present a danger to themselves or others, and bar those people from buying guns for a period of time. If Mr. Hole had been subject to such a determination after his mother contacted the authorities in March 2020, he would not have been able to legally buy two rifles, a Ruger AR-556 and an HM Defense HM15F, a few months later -- the semiautomatic weapons he would use to open fire on the workers in a packaging warehouse on Thursday night before fatally shooting himself.  But as effective as red flag laws may be in certain respects, such as preventing gun suicides, the new revelations about the handling of Mr. Hole's case last year show that the laws may fall well short in preventing the most horrific acts of gun violence.  ''I think people hear 'red flag' and they think it's the panacea to all these issues,'' Mr. Mears said in the news conference. ''It's not. What it is, is a good start,'' he said, adding that because of ''a number of loopholes in the practical application of this law,'' the authorities do not always have ''the tools they need to make the most well-informed decisions.''  In Mr. Hole's case, prosecutors considered his immediate mental health crisis -- his mother told them he had talked of killing himself -- to be the priority, and after his gun was taken away, they considered the crisis averted. Research has shown that red flag laws do prevent gun suicides, and some of those who have studied gun violence say that suicide prevention should be seen as the primary purpose of such laws.  Kendra Parris, a lawyer in Florida who has fought against risk protection orders, as red flag laws are legally described, said law enforcement officials have not had much success predicting who was capable of mass violence.  ''The idea that we are going to fix this with R.P.O.s at the state level,'' Ms. Parris said, ''it strikes me as folly.''  Even when authorities or individuals have gone to court to keep someone from keeping or acquiring guns, the efforts have not always been successful. In some cases, the courts have denied their petitions. In other cases where authorities initially won restrictions, the targets have later regained their ability to own weapons in follow-up hearings. One man in the Seattle area who wrote violent messages online -- one of them was ''Kill all women'' -- got his guns back after arguing before a judge that the messages were jokes.  Jeffrey Swanson, a professor in psychiatry at Duke University School of Medicine who has researched risk protection laws in various states, said Indiana's version was not ''the star example,'' marred by what he considered deficiencies in both due process and effectiveness. But he emphasized that any law should be part of a larger legal framework needed to prevent gun violence.  ''People say, 'Well, what's the one thing you should do to stop gun violence?''' he said. ''Well, it's not a one-thing problem and not a one-thing solution. In our country, this is a whole puzzle with lots of different legal tools that can work together.''  Indiana's red flag law, named after Timothy Laird, an officer known as Jake who was killed in the line of duty in 2004, is one of the oldest such laws in the country. Under the statute, a person is considered dangerous if he or she ''presents an imminent risk'' to oneself or others, or presents a more general risk but fits certain other criteria, including unmedicated mental illness or a documented propensity for violence.  Mr. Mears said his office had filed eight petitions this year involving Laird law cases; all are still pending. The Indianapolis police said on Monday that they recovered 191 guns last year through Laird law cases.  Law enforcement learned of Mr. Hole on March 3, 2020, when his mother and sister showed up at a police roll call, according to police records. The mother told the officers that her son was having suicidal thoughts, potentially wanting to attempt ''suicide by cop,'' said the chief of the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department, Randal Taylor. Several officers came to her house and took Mr. Hole to a hospital for a temporary mental health hold.  According to Mr. Mears, Mr. Hole's hospital stay ''was measured by hours and not days'' and ''no follow-up medication was prescribed.''  Had he been involuntarily committed under a judge's orders after a hearing, he would have been barred from possessing a firearm under federal law.  Still, Dr. Swanson said nearly two dozen states have laws that automatically impose some temporary gun restrictions even after shorter mental health commitments. This kind of statute -- rather than the more well-known red flag laws, which generally require a full court hearing and a judge's order -- could potentially have been a more useful tool in preventing Mr. Hole from buying more guns, he said. It is not entirely clear if this kind of law would have applied in Mr. Hole's case, but Indiana has no such law anyway.  Along with taking Mr. Hole to the hospital, the Indianapolis police took possession of a shotgun that he had recently bought. The gun was never returned; Mr. Mears said the family agreed to forfeit it.  As Mr. Mears explained it, with the seizure of the gun, ''we'd already achieved our objective.''  Mr. Mears noted several challenges that a filing under the state's red flag law would have presented, had prosecutors chosen to pursue a hearing. Chief among them were the brief, 14-day window prosecutors have to present a petition and the limited investigative tools available to them. While it can take months for a judge to make a final ruling on a red flag petition, the statute directs the court to hold a hearing within 14 days of a gun seizure.  ''We would have liked the opportunity to be able to subpoena his medical records,'' he said, as part of what would be needed to make a ''clear and convincing'' case. Search warrants are not allowed in this kind of procedure under Indiana's law. And there is a 30-day window to comply with a subpoena. ''We're dealing with a 14-day time window,'' he said. ''And we just didn't have the time to be able to do that.''  Losing the case, he said, could have required the police to return the shotgun they had seized, even though the family had voluntarily forfeited it.  Bradley Keffer, a lawyer in Indianapolis who has handled red flag cases -- called Laird hearings in Indiana -- said the prosecutors' decision in this case was understandable.  ''Most Laird hearings tend to come from law enforcement's natural interaction with an armed member of the public,'' he said. The police may encounter people who were involved in domestic violence or who had been threatening themselves or others. In that case, the authorities already have the key evidence -- the risk of danger -- for a Laird hearing.  But Mr. Hole's case appears to have been prompted by his family's concerns alone. Chief Taylor said that it was she, not Mr. Hole, who told the police of his suicidal thoughts, and that the officers who responded ''felt that she was believable enough'' to take immediate action. In police records, Mr. Hole appeared to play down his suicidal intentions. Proving to a judge that Mr. Hole presented a serious risk going forward would have been difficult, Mr. Keffer said. ''That's a lot to overcome,'' he said.  There were other parts of the law that Mr. Mears described as loopholes, though they did not apply in Mr. Hole's case. In 2018, prosecutors filed a Laird petition after the police seized a gun from a woman. While her case was pending before the judge, she legally bought another gun and shot her neighbor.  In the end, Mr. Mears said, the law needs ''improvement'' before it can be a truly effective tool against gun violence. ''I think it's a good start,'' he said, ''but it's far from perfect.''  Mike Baker contributed reporting.  Mike Baker contributed reporting.  Ryan Mears, center, a prosecutor in Indianapolis, defended the decision not to try to ban The FedEx attacker from buying firearms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J MAST FOR THE new_york_times) (A17)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00042 "
431		"    Conservative App Parler Can to Return to iPhones  By Jack Nicas  387 words 20 April 2021   4     Parler had been kicked off iPhones and Android devices after the Capitol insurrection in January.  Parler, the social network popular with conservatives, is making its comeback.  The app had been kicked off iPhones, Android devices and even the internet in January after tech companies said Parler had not effectively policed content on the network around the time of the Capitol insurrection on Jan. 6.  But on Monday, Apple said in a letter to two federal lawmakers that it had approved Parler's return to iPhones because the app had agreed to more aggressively patrol what its users posted, according to a copy of the letter obtained by The new_york_times.  An Apple lobbyist said in the letter that the iPhone maker had removed Parler from the App Store in January because it wasn't taking down ''posts that encouraged violence, denigrated various ethnic groups, races and religions, glorified Nazism, and called for violence against specific people.''  Since then, Apple employees have ''engaged in substantial conversations with Parler in an effort to bring the Parler app into compliance.'' Last week, Apple told Parler that it was welcome back because of changes it had agreed to make to the app, the lobbyist said in the letter. Parler would return to the App Store when it submitted its new app, he said.  Parler did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday.  Parler's return to iPhones follows the revival of its website after it went offline for about a month. Amazon had pulled support for Parler's social network in January, forcing its website to go dark. Parler came back online in February with the help of a small web-hosting company near Los Angeles called SkySilk.  Since then, some users have returned to Parler, but it appears there is less overall activity on the social network since the time of the election. Most of the conversation around Parler revolved around politics, and the user base was overwhelmingly supportive of former President Donald J. Trump. Executives at Parler, including its co-owner Rebekah Mercer, the conservative donor, hope the iPhone app can help the social network regain steam.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Cristobal Herrera-Ulashkevich/EPA, via Shutterstock FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003f "
432		"    Justices Are Asked to Open Secret Rulings of Spy Court  By Charlie Savage  1,263 words 20 April 2021   16     A prominent Republican -- Ted Olson -- backed the request for high court review of a spy court ruling, which would be the first of its kind.  WASHINGTON -- The American Civil Liberties Union asked the Supreme Court on Monday to unlock the doors to the nation's foreign intelligence wiretapping court, arguing that Americans have a First Amendment right to ask its judges to disclose secret rulings affecting their privacy.  If the justices take the case, it would be a landmark intervention: Since Congress created the secretive court system to regulate national-security surveillance in 1978, the Supreme Court has never agreed to review any of its decisions. And among a bevy of supporters who signed the petition, one name stood out: the prominent lawyer Theodore B. Olson.  Mr. Olson has helped bolster government surveillance powers in past phases of his storied career. As head of the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel in the Reagan administration, he secretly blessed National Security Agency tactics. As solicitor general in the George W. Bush administration, he successfully defended part of the USA Patriot Act, a surveillance law Congress enacted after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.  This time, however, Mr. Olson is putting his weight behind groups who tend to be skeptical of government surveillance powers.  They are seeking overturn decisions in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court system which rejected the A.C.L.U.'s claim that it has a First Amendment right of access to petition for disclosures of rulings affecting Americans' privacy rights. Supporters argue that while people may disagree about the merits of such rulings, it is crucial that the public have access to them.  The surveillance court's assertion that it ''cannot even consider such a claim,'' the petition said, ''cannot be squared with the unbroken tradition of public access to judicial opinions, or with the logic in upholding a qualified entitlement to legal opinions concerning the nation's surveillance laws.''  The petition was also signed by lawyers at the A.C.L.U., at an open-government advocacy clinic at Yale Law School and at the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University. Mr. Olson is a member of the latter organization's board.  Following revelations in the 1970s that administrations of both parties had abused national-security wiretapping powers, Congress enacted the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA, to impose a warrant requirement for wiretapping on domestic soil in counterintelligence or counterterrorism investigations.  The law created a special court made up of sitting federal judges to review such applications. Because only the government appeared before it, submitting secret evidence that a target was most likely an agent of a foreign power, this court has conducted nearly all its work outside public view.  In 2013, as part of Edward J. Snowden's leaks, it came to light that the surveillance court had for years interpreted a provision of the USA Patriot Act to justify secret bulk collection of logs of all Americans' phone calls and emails, prompting an uproar.  In another case brought by the A.C.L.U., a regular federal appeals court later said that interpretation of the law was wrong. Congress outlawed bulk data collection under the Patriot Act, created a new position of an outsider with a security clearance to help FISA judges critique government arguments, and decreed that significant FISA court rulings about what surveillance law means must generally be made public, with appropriate redactions.  The petition suggests, however, that this disclosure requirement is inadequate. Decisions about what to release are conducted by the executive branch, not the court. The government does not follow the same standards courts have applied to public access claims to other court records, and it can waive disclosure for national-security reasons. And the government has taken the position that the requirement does not apply to rulings before 2015, when Congress enacted the overhaul.  The A.C.L.U. has failed in several attempts to get surveillance court judges to order the release of the court's rulings. In the most recent, it lost on a jurisdictional question. But it has also lost on the legal merits of claims that the public has a First Amendment right of access to opinions that affect its privacy and free association rights.  If the Supreme Court decides to accept the petition and take up the case, Mr. Olson said that he would be willing to argue the matter if the A.C.L.U. wanted him to do so. By his count, he has argued 65 cases before the justices.  Mr. Olson was long known as a consummate Republican establishment lawyer. He argued the Bush v. Gore case, which handed victory in the disputed 2000 election to Mr. Bush, and the Citizens United case, which amplified the power of corporate money in politics.  His later legal work has expanded beyond traditional Republican Party positions, including challenging California's former ban on same-sex marriage and representing the young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers. Still, given his history in surveillance matters, his participation in this case is striking.  In 1984, as head of the Office of Legal Counsel, Mr. Olson signed what has been described as a landmark memo blessing National Security Agency surveillance techniques of that era that Congress did not cover in FISA -- like tapping transoceanic cables from the international seabed, and intercepting satellite transmissions -- as lawful even when they swept in Americans' communications without a warrant.  The government is still keeping that memo secret. In 2018, a federal judge rejected a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed by The new_york_times seeking its public disclosure, deferring to the executive branch's decision that it must remain entirely classified. (In a separate case, the A.C.L.U. has also sought its disclosure without success.)  In an interview, Mr. Olson chuckled when asked about the 1984 memo. He recalled visiting the National Security Agency more than two decades later, as a member of the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, and said agency officials came up to him and said, ''oh the Olson Opinion, the Olson Opinion. Years later, and they were still talking about the Olson Opinion -- but not very publicly.''  Mr. Bush appointed Mr. Olson to that board after he had served as solicitor general in the president's first term, making him one of its most important legal officers in the post-Sept. 11 period. (Mr. Olson's wife was among the victims of those attacks, as a passenger on the plane that Qaeda hijackers crashed into the Pentagon.)  In 2002, he appeared on behalf of the government before the FISA review court, a three-judge panel of appellate judges, in the first case in which it was convened to hear an appeal of a surveillance court decision. He persuaded the panel to overturn a surveillance court ruling that had struck down an expansion of government power in part of the USA Patriot Act.  In the interview, Mr. Olson said he stands by his legal work on surveillance legal policy in 1984 and 2002 -- even though this time around, he stands in a different corner.  ''Judges can't render opinions that are completely insulated from public review,'' Mr. Olson said, adding: ''I think we are on sound footing.''  Theodore B. Olson, a noted G.O.P. lawyer who has helped shape U.S. surveillance policy, supports efforts to allow scrutiny of wiretapping decisions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003v "
433		"    The Solitary Queen  359 words 20 April 2021   24     A reader says no other picture has captured our experience as a world since the onset of Covid. Also: Leave Karen alone; yoga as a path to wisdom.  To the Editor:  Your April 18 front-page photograph of Queen Elizabeth II sitting alone in a choir stall of St. George's Chapel at the funeral service for her husband, Prince Philip, was indescribably poignant. It was also iconic.  I can think of no other image that has so perfectly captured our experience as a world since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic more than a year ago. That solitary woman portrayed it all: grief, isolation, loneliness, and through it all determination, deep faith and incomparable dignity.  (Rev.) Edward A. Ryan  Garden City, N.Y.  My Name Is Karen. Enough With the Insults.  To the Editor:  Re ''I'm the Head of Planned Parenthood. We're Done Making Excuses for Our Founder'' (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, April 17):  I have always been a big supporter of Planned Parenthood, but after reading Alexis McGill Johnson's article about Margaret Sanger, I am really disappointed. Ms. McGill Johnson repeatedly used my name, Karen, as a reference to bad people. Horrible people. She has bought into the grade-school mentality that has perpetrated this insult.  Well, other Karens and I have had it.  Ms. McGill Johnson advocates for reproductive freedom for all. How about freedom from juvenile insults involving your name? I have always loved my name, so there.  Karen Roy  Napa, Calif.  Insight Into Wisdom  To the Editor:  Re ''Wisdom Isn't What You Think It Is'' (column, April 16):  David Brooks's understanding of wisdom resonates with me. After 88 years of life and 48 years of practicing yoga daily, I feel very comfortable with his point of view. I have made lots of mistakes but have had many more successes.  I have always paid attention to one of my teacher's sayings: ''It's a good day to fail; that's when you really learn something.''  Edward J. Wardwell  Oberlin, Ohio  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Jonathan Brady FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003d "
434		"    Ukraine Casts Wary Eye on Overt Russian Troop Buildup  By Anton Troianovski  1,564 words 20 April 2021   9     Few analysts believe Moscow intends to invade. But as Russia's military buildup proceeds, the tension is rising in war-weary Eastern Ukraine.  MARIUPOL, Ukraine -- There are the booms that echo again, and parents know to tell their children they are only fireworks. There are the drones the separatists started flying behind the lines at night, dropping land mines. There are the fresh trenches the Ukrainians can see their enemy digging, the increase in sniper fire pinning them inside their own.  But perhaps the starkest evidence that the seven-year-old war in Ukraine may be entering a new phase is what Capt. Mykola Levytskyi coast guard unit saw cruising in the Azov Sea just outside the port city of Mariupol last week: a flotilla of Russian amphibious assault ships.  Since the start of the war in 2014, Russia has used the pretext of a separatist conflict to pressure Ukraine after its Westward-looking revolution, supplying arms and men to Kremlin-backed rebels in the country's east while denying it was a party to the fight.  Few Western analysts believe the Kremlin is planning an invasion of eastern Ukraine, given the likely backlash at home and abroad. But with a large-scale Russian troop buildup on land and sea on Ukraine's doorstep, the view is spreading among officials and wide swathes of the Ukrainian public that Moscow is signaling more bluntly than ever before that it is prepared to openly enter the conflict.  ''These ships are, concretely, a threat from the Russian state,'' Captain Levytskyi said over the whir of his speedboat's engines as it plied the Azov Sea, after pointing out a Russian patrol boat stationed six miles offshore. ''It is a much more serious threat.''  Many Ukrainian military officials and volunteer fighters say that they still find it unlikely that Russia will openly invade Ukraine, and that they do not see evidence of an imminent offensive among the gathered Russian forces. But they speculate over other possibilities, including Russia's possible recognition or annexation of the separatist-held territories in eastern Ukraine.  Ukrainians are awaiting President Vladimir V. Putin's annual state-of-the-nation address to Russia on Wednesday, an affair often rife with geopolitical signaling, for clues about what comes next.  ''I feel confused, I feel tension,'' Oleksandr Tkachenko, Ukraine's culture and information policy minister, said in an interview.  Mr. Tkachenko listed some invasion scenarios: a three-pronged Russian attack from north, south and east; an assault from separatist-held territory; and an attempt to capture a Dnieper River water supply for Crimea.  Russia, for its part, has done little to hide its buildup, insisting that it has been massing troops in response to heightened military activity in the region by NATO and Ukraine.  Ukrainian officials deny any plans to escalate the war, but there is no question that President Volodymyr Zelensky has taken a harder line against Russia in recent months.  Mr. Zelensky has closed pro-Russian TV channels and imposed sanctions against Mr. Putin's closest ally in Ukraine. He has also declared more openly than before his desire to have Ukraine join NATO, a remote possibility that the Kremlin nevertheless regards as a dire threat to Russia's security.  Interviews with frontline units across a 150-mile swath of eastern Ukraine in recent days underscored the fast-rising tensions in Europe's only active armed conflict. Officials and volunteers acknowledge apprehension over Russia's troop movements, and civilians feel numb and hopeless after seven years of war. At least 28 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed in fighting this year, the military says.  ''We live in sadness,'' said Anna Dikareva, a 48-year-old postal service worker in the frontline industrial town of Avdiivka, where people scarcely flinch when shells explode in the distance. ''I don't want war, but we won't solve this in a peaceful way, either.''  For much of last year, a cease-fire held.  Mr. Zelensky, a television comedian elected in 2019 on a promise to end the war, negotiated with the Kremlin for step-by-step compromises to ease the hardships of frontline residents and look for ways out of a conflict that has killed more than 13,000 people. But Russia's insistence on policies that would essentially give it a say in eastern Ukraine's future was unacceptable to Kyiv.  ''The hope that Zelensky had to solve this issue, it didn't happen,'' said Mr. Tkachenko, the information minister and a longtime associate of the president.  Instead, the fighting has picked up again.  The Ukrainians' labyrinths of trenches and fortifications along the roughly 250-mile front is by now so well established that in one tunnel near Avdiivka, the soldiers put up multicolored Christmas lights to spruce up the darkness. The town lies just a few miles north of the city of Donetsk, the separatists' main stronghold.  At their hillside battle position, overlooking a separatist position in a T-shaped growth of trees, the soldiers described the sound of separatist drones they said carried land mines dropped about a mile behind the line. Since December and January, they said, sniper fire from the other side increased, and they could see the separatists digging new trenches.  The lettering above the skull on their shoulder patches read: ''Ukraine or death.''  ''The enemy has activated lately,'' said one 58-year-old soldier, nicknamed ''the professor,'' who said he would not give his full name for security reasons.  In Avdiivka, a volunteer unit of Ukraine's ultranationalist Right Sector keeps a pet wolf in a cage outside the commander's office. The commander, Dmytro Kotsyubaylo -- his nom de guerre is Da Vinci -- jokes that the fighters feed it the bones of Russian-speaking children, a reference to Russian state media tropes about the evils of Ukrainian nationalists.  Both sides have accused each other of increasing numbers of cease-fire violations, but Mr. Kotsyubaylo said that -- to his regret -- his fighters were allowed to fire only in response to attacks from the separatist side.  On the video screen above his desk, Mr. Kotsyubaylo showed high-definition drone footage depicting the quotidian violence taking place just 400 miles from the European Union's borders. In one sequence, two of his unit's mortar rounds explode around separatist trenches; a naked man emerges, sprinting. In another, an explosion is seen at what he said was a separatist sniper position; the clearing smoke reveals a body coated with yellow dust.  Asked what he expects to happen next, Mr. Kotsyubaylo responded: ''full-scale war.''  Mr. Kotsyubaylo said he believed Russia's troop movements north and south of separatist-held territory were a ruse meant to draw Ukrainian forces away from the front line. He said he expected Russia instead to launch an offensive using its separatist proxies in the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk ''people's republics,'' allowing Mr. Putin to continue to claim that the war is an internal Ukrainian affair.  ''If Russia wanted to do it in secret, they would do it in secret,'' Mr. Kotsyubaylo said of the massing troops. ''They're doing everything they can for us to see them, and to show us how cool Putin is.''  Under the peace plan negotiated in Minsk, Belarus, in 2015, both sides' heavy weaponry is required to be positioned well behind the front line.  Ukraine's artillery is now stationed in places like a Soviet-era tractor yard in an out-of-the-way village reached by treacherous dirt roads an hour's drive from Mariupol. Col. Andrii Shubin, the base commander, said he was ready to send his artillery guns and his American-provided weapon-locating radar trucks to the front as soon as the order came.  Ukrainian officials say that they are not repositioning troops in response to the Russian buildup, and that any current troop movements are normal rotations.  On Monday, dozens of tanks and armored vehicles could be seen on the move in the southwest of the government-controlled area of eastern Ukraine's Donetsk region. Soldiers relaxed on cots at a village train station under graffiti that used an obscenity to refer to Mr. Putin.  Around the region, from Mariupol's fashionable waterfront to the shrapnel-scarred streets of Avdiivka, many residents said they were so exhausted from the war that they did not even want to consider the possibility that the fighting will flare up again.  Lena Pisarenko, a 45-year-old Russian teacher in Avdiivka, said she had never stopped keeping an emergency supply of water on hand in pots and bottles all over her apartment and her balcony. During the shelling at the height of the war, she created a ritual to keep her children calm: They would play board games and drink tea while three candles burn down three times. Then it was time for bed.  Another woman passing by, Olga Volvach, 41, said she was paying little mind to the recent escalation in shelling.  ''Our balcony door isolates sound well,'' she said.  Maria Varenikova contributed reporting from Mariupol, Ukraine.  Ukrainian border guards patrolling the Sea of Azov on Sunday, where Russian ships were cruising. After years of war, Capt. Mykola Levytskyi, left, called them ''a much more serious threat.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRENDAN HOFFMAN FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004p "
435		"    Extra! Extra! Village Voice Is Back on the Newsstand  By Katie Robertson  504 words 20 April 2021   4     Its first print incarnation since 2017 includes an article on New York's mayoral race, and another that revives the paper's tradition of shaming landlords.  New Yorkers may have noticed something strange in the last few days: copies of The Village Voice, fresh off the press and still free, on newsstands and in street boxes.  ''It all makes sense,'' said the longtime Voice columnist Michael Musto, who has a byline in the return issue. ''New York is back, The Voice is back, I'm back.''  The new issue, which came out on Saturday, is the first print incarnation of the storied independent publication since August 2017, when its previous owner, Peter D. Barbey, took it digital-only a year before shutting it down. Brian Calle, the publisher of LA Weekly, bought The Voice in December and revived its dormant website in January.  ''For us, putting a print issue out was a stake in the ground,'' Mr. Calle said. ''It really makes the relaunch of The Village Voice real in a way it wasn't before.''  He plans to publish a print issue about four times a year, he added, meaning that a famed alt-weekly is now an alt-quarterly. The end goal is to publish monthly.  The comeback issue includes an article by the former Voice reporter Ross Barkan on the New York mayoral race, and one by Eileen Markey that revives the paper's tradition of shaming the city's landlords.  Mr. Musto wrote on his Oscar predictions. It's his second return to The Voice. He was laid off in 2013, brought back in 2015 and sent packing once more, along with his colleagues, at the time of the 2018 shutdown.  Mr. Calle said he had not appointed an editor in chief, but was having conversations with people as he rebuilt the newsroom. R.C. Baker, a longtime Voice writer, has taken the role of senior editor.  After The new_york_times reported the sale of The Voice last year, some journalists expressed concerns about Mr. Calle as the proprietor of the downtown paper, which was founded in 1955 by Dan Wolf, Edwin Fancher and Norman Mailer. Mr. Calle was previously an opinion editor at The Orange County Register in California and a vice president of the Claremont Institute, a conservative think tank, and his tenure at LA Weekly has been marked by boycotts led by former writers for the publication and a lawsuit filed by an investor.  Mr. Musto said Mr. Calle was a fan of the paper's old spirit. ''He wants The Village Voice in all of its old, spunky, lefty history,'' he said. ''The new issue, to me, looks very Village Voice-y.''  Mr. Calle said anyone concerned about the latest iteration should read it and ''judge for themselves.''  Copies of The Village Voice appeared in street boxes over the weekend. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN TAGGART FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004q "
436		"   LETTER  The Solitary Queen  153 words 20 April 2021   24     ''I can think of no other image that has so perfectly captured our experience as a world since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic,'' a reader writes of the queen sitting alone at her husband's funeral.  To the Editor:  Your April 18 front-page photograph of Queen Elizabeth II sitting alone in a choir stall of St. George's Chapel at the funeral service for her husband, Prince Philip, was indescribably poignant. It was also iconic.  I can think of no other image that has so perfectly captured our experience as a world since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic more than a year ago. That solitary woman portrayed it all: grief, isolation, loneliness, and through it all determination, deep faith and incomparable dignity.  (Rev.) Edward A. Ryan  Garden City, N.Y.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Jonathan Brady FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003e "
437		"    Progressives Seek More To Fix to Public Housing In Infrastructure Bundle  By Emily Cochrane  1,552 words 20 April 2021   16     The proposal, called the Green New Deal for Public Housing Act, is a marker for liberals as Democrats seek to influence President Biden's $2.3 trillion public-works package.  WASHINGTON -- Top liberal lawmakers unveiled legislation on Monday that would pour more than $100 billion over a decade into modernizing the public housing system and starting a transition to renewable energy, as progressives seek to prod President Biden to expand his far-reaching infrastructure plan.  The legislation, led by Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent, and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, is the first of multiple proposals from progressives who are trying to shape the president's $2.3 trillion package, which Mr. Biden has said aims both to overhaul infrastructure and to address climate change and economic inequities.  Its proponents estimate that it would invest at least triple the amount that Mr. Biden has proposed to tackle a large backlog of improvements to the nation's aging public housing system.  The proposal reflects the fraught politics surrounding the plan on Capitol Hill: To pass his plan, Mr. Biden can probably afford to lose no more than a few Democratic votes given the potential for united Republican opposition. Republicans say they want to compromise on the measure, but have largely panned it as too costly and expansive, and condemned the idea of paying for it through tax increases. Democrats are broadly in favor, but their leaders will have to navigate between the demands of liberals like Ms. Ocasio-Cortez and Mr. Sanders, who want even more spending, and moderates who have signaled they would support a smaller package that could draw some Republican backing.  While the president has outlined the broad contours of his proposal, it is up to lawmakers to reach agreement on the final provisions and details of the legislation, and the package has already spurred a flurry of lobbying from rank-and-file members.  The progressives' latest proposal, called the Green New Deal for Public Housing Act, is a prong of the broader climate platform that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez and others have long championed to help the United States wean itself from fossil fuels. It would repeal limitations on the construction of public housing and create grant programs to ensure improvements that not only address unsafe and aging housing, but reduce carbon emissions.  ''We're here to make sure the Democratic Party upholds its values and keeps its promises, and to also push and expand the scope and the ambition of the Democratic Party,'' Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said in an interview. She and other liberal lawmakers are expected to reintroduce additional parts of the Green New Deal platform this week.  To qualify for the grants, recipients would have to adhere to strong labor standards, such as protection of collective bargaining rights and the use of American manufacturing and products. The legislation would also fund tenant protection vouchers for displaced residents and create apprenticeship programs for residents.  ''What's different now is there really is an opportunity -- a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity -- to address this backlog and have Congress address the funding that's needed,'' said Diane Yentel, the president and chief executive of the National Low Income Housing Coalition. ''This may be the moment, at long last.''  When Mr. Biden outlined his proposal last month, he called for more than $40 billion to improve public housing infrastructure. At an event in New York on Sunday, a group of lawmakers from the state, including Senator Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, pushed for at least double that figure.  ''Public housing has been neglected, left to get worse, and we're not going to stand for it anymore,'' Mr. Schumer said. The president's plan, he added, was ''a good start, but it ain't enough.''  Mr. Sanders, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez and their allies envision their proposal costing $119 billion to $172 billion over 10 years to meet the needs of the country, according to an estimate from the Climate + Community Project provided to The new_york_times. It aims to create thousands of maintenance and construction jobs.  While some lawmakers have floated the prospect of splitting apart Mr. Biden's plan and moving a scaled-back version first in an effort to win the 10 Republican votes needed to overcome the 60-vote filibuster threshold in the Senate, the progressives are pushing for one huge bill that goes even further.  ''Probably our best bet would be one bill -- and it should be a large bill,'' Mr. Sanders said in an interview. ''I think it's just easier and more efficient for us to work as hard as we can in a comprehensive broad infrastructure plan, which includes human infrastructure as well as physical infrastructure.''  Republicans, who have sought to portray the Green New Deal as federal overreach that would harm the economy, have already seized on the climate and housing provisions in Mr. Biden's plan as far beyond the traditional definition of infrastructure. Mr. Biden is also preparing a second proposal that would focus even more on projects outside what Republicans call ''real'' infrastructure and could bring the total cost to $4 trillion.  ''Republicans are not going to partner with Democrats on the Green New Deal or on raising taxes to pay for it,'' Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming, said at a news conference last month. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, has repeatedly warned that the infrastructure plan is ''a Trojan horse'' for liberal priorities, while Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the No. 2 House Republican, declared last week that ''it's a lot of Green New Deal'' that would lead voters to turn away from Democrats.  ''I think the expansive definition of infrastructure that we see in this sort of 'Green New Deal wish list' is called into question,'' Senator Shelley Moore Capito, Republican of West Virginia, said on Fox News last week. ''I don't think that the American people, when they think of infrastructure, are thinking of home health aides and other things that are included in this bill.''  A group of Democrats has raised the possibility of breaking off the parts of Mr. Biden's plan with broad bipartisan appeal -- addressing roads, bridges and broadband -- and attempting to pass it with Republican votes before Democrats turn to the more ambitious elements the G.O.P. has rejected. Then, they argue, Democrats could use the fast-track budget reconciliation process to bypass the filibuster and unilaterally push the remainder of the package through both chambers.  ''I think that if we come together in a bipartisan way to pass that $800 billion hard infrastructure bill that you were talking about, that I've been urging, then we show our people that we can solve their problems,'' Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, said on ''Fox News Sunday.''  But there is no guarantee that bipartisan support would materialize even for a more limited plan, and many liberals fear that if it did, the strategy would sap momentum for their more ambitious ideas.  While the progressives' proposal is largely unchanged from its original iteration in 2019, the political landscape is vastly different, with Democrats in control of Washington. Mr. Sanders now leads the Senate Budget Committee, and a historic investment of federal funds to counter the economic and health effects of the coronavirus pandemic has some lawmakers and voters more open to substantial spending.  ''The time has now caught up to the legislation, and I'm really thrilled about that,'' Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said. ''You have a respiratory pandemic that's layered on communities that are suffering from childhood asthma, that are already dealing with lung issues, that have pre-existing hypertension, which are all indicated by factors of environmental injustice.''  The Congressional Progressive Caucus, in an outline of five priorities for the final infrastructure product, singled out elements of the housing legislation, including the energy-efficiency standards. But with slim margins in both chambers and a huge lobbying campaign underway to ensure pet policies and provisions are included, it is unclear how Democrats would work this proposal in and whether every member of the caucus would sign on.  Mr. Sanders acknowledged that the path forward for his proposal -- and a number of other liberal priorities -- could be difficult even with Democrats in control. Even using the budget reconciliation process, which requires only a majority for passage, every Senate Democrat would need to remain united behind the entire package.  ''That is not easy stuff,'' Mr. Sanders said. ''People have different perspectives, people come from very different types of states, different politics, and that's going to be a very difficult job for both the House and the Senate.''  Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent, acknowledges that a plan to link housing and climate change faces major hurdles. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEFANI REYNOLDS FOR THE new_york_times); Filling sand bags to protect public housing before the arrival of Hurricane Dorian in Lumberton, N.C., in September 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE new_york_times); Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York is pushing the Green New Deal for Public Housing Act in the House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNA MONEYMAKER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003s "
438		"    Breakaway League Stands Defiantly Amid the Threats and Boos  By Tariq Panja  1,815 words 20 April 2021   7     The founding members of a league that would reshape soccer have warned the sport's leaders that they will fight any effort to block their plans.  LONDON -- The superclubs have called in the lawyers. The president of European soccer has responded, calling the teams' leaders ''snakes and liars.'' And the fans want no part of any of it.  The pitched battle to pursue, or prevent, a breakaway European soccer superleague started to take shape on Monday, hours after the stunning announcement late Sunday night by 12 of the sport's richest and most popular teams that they were forming one.  The plan threatens to redraw the European soccer economy, from rich clubs in the Premier League to tiny ones in every corner of the continent, and funnel billions of dollars toward a handful of wealthy elite teams. It would represent one of the biggest wealth transfers in sports history, imperil the future of marquee events like the Champions League and threaten the existence of the domestic leagues and the smaller clubs that were left behind.  By first light on Monday, the fight was on. In a letter written by the breakaway teams, they warned soccer's authorities that they had taken legal action to prevent any efforts to block their project.  A few hours later, Aleksander Ceferin, the president of European soccer's governing body, UEFA, used his first public appearance to denounce the group behind the plan and vowed to take stern action if it did not reverse course. He raised the possibility of barring players on the participating teams from events like the World Cup and other tournaments, and threatened to banish the rebel clubs from their domestic leagues. Sunday's announcement, he said, amounted to ''spitting in football fans' faces.''  By then the outrage was spreading. In Germany, Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund -- clubs seen as potential joiners of the breakaway league -- distanced themselves from the plan. In France, Paris St.-Germain midfielder Ander Herrera lamented ''the rich stealing what the people created.'' In Spain, La Liga has convened a meeting of its clubs but will hold it without the three teams -- Real Madrid, Barcelona and Atlético Madrid -- who have agreed to join the Super League.  And in England, coaches and players revealed they had not been consulted on the move, fan groups united in their opposition to the proposal, and, in Liverpool, supporters demanded the club remove their banners from the team's stadium before its next home game on Saturday.  ''We feel we can no longer give our support to a club which puts financial greed above integrity of the game,'' one of the groups said on Twitter.  As they went public on Sunday with their plans for the European Super League, though, the proposal's backers simultaneously wrote to the president of FIFA, world soccer's governing body, and to UEFA's Ceferin saying that they would like to work with the organizations but that they had also taken measures to protect their interests.  The group includes a dozen top teams from England, Spain and Italy, such as Manchester United, Liverpool, Real Madrid and Juventus, and its six-page missive made clear its intent to proceed, and to overcome any opposition.  Rumors of the creation of the breakaway competition, which hopes to add three more permanent founding members to what will be an annual 20-team league, prompted FIFA in January to bow to pressure from UEFA and issue a statement that threatened severe repercussions against players and clubs involved in any unsanctioned tournament. FIFA issued a statement of ''disapproval'' of the breakaway plan on Sunday, but notably did not repeat the threat of expelling those who took part.  Faced with that threat, though, the company created to control the new Super League said in its letter sent on Sunday that motions had been filed in multiple courts to prevent any moves to jeopardize the project, which, its organizers said, has $4 billion of financing in place.  The company has ''taken appropriate action to challenge the legality of the restrictions to the formation of the competition before such relevant courts and European authorities as may be necessary to safeguard its future,'' said the letter, a copy of which was reviewed by The new_york_times.  The superleague the clubs have agreed to form -- an alliance of top teams closer in concept to closed leagues like the N.F.L. and the N.B.A. than to soccer's current model -- would bring about the most significant restructuring of elite European soccer since the creation of the European Cup (now the Champions League) in the 1950s.  Yet even as it detailed its pre-emptive legal actions, the six-page letter invited soccer's leaders to hold ''urgent'' talks to find a common path forward for a project that the group says will benefit soccer even beyond the narrow group that will enjoy unparalleled riches. Under the plan announced Sunday, the 15 founding members of the Super League would share an initial pool of 3.5 billion euros, about $4.2 billion.  That equates to some $400 million each, more than four times what the winner of the Champions League took home in 2020. In the letter, the founders of the Super League said they did not wish to replace the Champions League, but instead wanted to create a tournament that would run alongside it.  The damage to the prestige and value of the Champions League, though, would be immediate and run into the billions of dollars, turning what has for decades been club soccer's elite competition into a secondary event, one that is unlikely to retain anything close to its current commercial appeal.  In a concurrent effort to make the event more valuable, UEFA on Monday ratified the biggest changes to the Champions League since 1992. And then Ceferin held a news conference in which he took direct aim at the rival league.  Having digested the letter's content, Ceferin said, he was in no mood to acquiesce to demands for an urgent meeting. Instead, he issued pointed rebukes to several of the men leading the effort, and singled out Andrea Agnelli, the chairman of the Italian champion Juventus.  Agnelli, who resigned from his role on UEFA's executive committee after the announcement of the breakaway, had spoken to Ceferin as recently as Saturday. At the time, Ceferin said, Agnelli had told the UEFA president he fully supported changes to the Champions League and dismissed talk of a breakaway as ''just rumors.''  ''Agnelli is the biggest disappointment of all,'' said Ceferin, who worked as a criminal lawyer before moving into soccer. ''I've never seen a person who would lie so many times and so persistently as he did.''  Ed Woodward, the vice chairman of Manchester United, gave his support for UEFA's Champions League restructuring as recently as Thursday, Ceferin added. He said UEFA was considering seeking damages from the 12 clubs that formed the breakaway group, and even from some of their top officials.  Still, he enters the next stage of the fight for control of European soccer with the support of some top club executives. Nasser al-Khelaifi, the chairman of the French champion Paris St.-Germain, was among the officials who voted to approve the changes to the Champions League, and he has resisted efforts to lure P.S.G., a club stocked with some of the world's best players, to the new league.  Teams in Germany, including last season's Champions League winner, Bayern Munich, and its biggest domestic rival, Borussia Dortmund, also have declined to join the new venture. In another boost for UEFA, Bayern's chairman, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, was chosen to replace Agnelli on UEFA's board.  The substantial changes to the Champions League may now be consigned to irrelevance, though, if the breakaway clubs manage to get their way and take to the field in a competition that they said they hoped to begin as soon as this summer. Their urgency stems from their financing; the investment bank JPMorgan Chase has provided four billion euros in debt financing to start the league, but it is contingent on the group's securing a broadcast contract.  In the letter, the group said that its urgency stemmed from the huge losses piling up as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. The sight of games played in cavernous but empty stadiums has become the norm, and restrictions on public gatherings mean that hundreds of millions of dollars are being lost in gate receipts in every league in Europe, while broadcasters have also clawed back vast sums from leagues and competition organizers.  The biggest European clubs have long been frustrated with sharing the wealth created by tournaments in which they are the biggest draw, and talks about a new league began well before the pandemic. Documents that leaked in 2019 showed that the president of Real Madrid, Florentino Pérez, an architect of the current plan, had sought to create an earlier iteration of a competition involving the biggest teams.  The role FIFA will play in the fight over the Super League is intriguing, too. Its president, Gianni Infantino, has talked in recent years of creating new competitions to increase interest in soccer around the globe. As part of that push, he has given his backing to a 20-team superleague in Africa.  FIFA issued a statement late Sunday in which it reiterated that it would not support a closed breakaway competition. The Super League's founders, though, insisted that their event is not completely closed, since they plan to provide access every season to five teams outside the 15 founding members.  Ceferin said he expected Infantino to dispel any doubts about his position on Tuesday when he addresses UEFA's annual meeting.  For now, UEFA and other groups opposed to the new competition are huddling to discuss their legal options, and engaging in talks with governments across Europe as well as with the European Union. Ceferin praised some of the politicians who have publicly condemned the Super League plan, including Britain's prime minister, Boris Johnson, and France's president, Emmanuel Macron.  Yet he also offered an olive branch to the rebel clubs.  He told them it was not too late to come back from the brink. While relationships have been damaged, he said, he vowed to act professionally for the benefit of European soccer. While he felt betrayed by the ''greediness, selfishness and narcissism'' of some of those involved, he would not -- with the possible exception of Agnelli -- make things personal. Ceferin is the godfather to Agnelli's youngest child.  Liverpool fans hung banners outside the team's stadium, Anfield, to protest the team's decision to join the European Super League. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JON SUPER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0004k "
439		"   SIDEBAR  Justices Increasingly Express Dim View of the News Media  By Adam Liptak  969 words 20 April 2021   13     A comprehensive look at references to the press in justices' opinions revealed ''a marked and previously undocumented uptick in negative depictions.''  WASHINGTON -- Last month, in a dissent in a routine libel case, a prominent federal judge lashed out at the news media.  ''Two of the three most influential papers (at least historically), The new_york_times and The Washington Post, are virtually Democratic Party broadsheets,'' wrote Judge Laurence H. Silberman of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. ''And the news section of The Wall Street Journal leans in the same direction.''  ''Nearly all television -- network and cable -- is a Democratic Party trumpet,'' he wrote. ''Even the government-supported National Public Radio follows along.''  The dissent endorsed a 2019 opinion from Justice Clarence Thomas calling for the Supreme Court to reconsider new_york_times v. Sullivan, the landmark 1964 ruling that made it hard for public officials to win libel suits.  ''new_york_times and the court's decisions extending it were policy-driven decisions masquerading as constitutional law,'' Justice Thomas wrote. In a dissent in a criminal case a few months later, he wrote, quoting a previous opinion, that ''the media often seeks 'to titillate rather than to educate and inform.'''  No other member of the Supreme Court joined Justice Thomas's opinion urging it to revisit the foundational 1964 libel decision, and Judge Silberman's dissent was widely criticized. J. Michael Luttig, a former federal appeals court judge who was on President George W. Bush's short list of potential Supreme Court nominees, called the dissent shocking and dangerous in an opinion essay in The Washington Post last month.  But the negative views from the bench of the news media may not be outliers. A new study, to be published in The North Carolina Law Review, documents a broader trend at the Supreme Court. The study tracked every reference to the news media in the justices' opinions since 1784 and found ''a marked and previously undocumented uptick in negative depictions of the press by the U.S. Supreme Court.''  The study was not limited to cases concerning First Amendment rights. It took account of ''all references to the press in its journalistic role, to the performance of commonly understood press functions or to the right of press freedom.'' Many of these references were in passing comments in decisions on matters as varied as antitrust or criminal law.  ''A generation ago, the court actively taught the public that the press was a check on government, a trustworthy source of accurate coverage, an entity to be specially protected from regulation and an institution with specific constitutional freedoms,'' wrote the study's authors, RonNell Andersen Jones, a law professor at the University of Utah, and Sonja R. West, a law professor at the University of Georgia. ''Today, in contrast, it almost never speaks of the press, press freedom or press functions, and when it does, it is in an overwhelmingly less positive manner.''  Compare, for instance, Justice Hugo Black's concurring opinion in 1971 in the Pentagon Papers case, allowing publication of a secret history of the Vietnam War, with Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's majority opinion in 2010 in the Citizens United campaign finance case.  Justice Black wrote that ''The new_york_times, The Washington Post and other newspapers should be commended for serving the purpose that the founding fathers saw so clearly.''  ''In revealing the workings of government that led to the Vietnam War,'' he wrote, ''the newspapers nobly did precisely that which the founders hoped and trusted they would do.''  Justice Kennedy, by contrast, lamented ''the decline of print and broadcast media'' and the ''sound bites, talking points and scripted messages that dominate the 24-hour news cycle.''  There may be many reasons for the shift documented in the study beyond a change in judicial attitudes. The news media may have become less trustworthy and more ideologically skewed. It has certainly become more various and harder to define. And it has been the subject of relentless attack from politicians, notably former President Donald J. Trump.  ''Some shift might be expected,'' Professor Jones said in an interview. ''But the uniformity and degree of it was pretty staggering. On every meaningful measure we could come up with, the current court is significantly less positive about press-related matters.''  The study found that conservative justices have always been more apt to write negative things about the press. The new development is that liberal justices now have little good to say about it.  ''The press, therefore, seems to be experiencing the double whammy of compounded negativity from the ideological group at the court that has been historically negative (the conservative justices) and a loss of positivity from the ideological group that has been historically positive (the liberal justices),'' the study said. ''Ideology is simply no longer predictive of positive treatment.''  Professor Jones said she was struck by one data point in particular: ''There hasn't been a single positive reference to the trustworthiness of the press from any justice on the court in more than a decade,'' she said.  After examining ''more than 8,000 characterizations of the press over the course of 235 years,'' the study concluded that ''there is not a single indicator that bodes well for the press's position before the current U.S. Supreme Court.''  ''The forecast for press treatment at the U.S. Supreme Court,'' the study said, ''may be dire.''  Conservative justices have always been more apt to write negatively about the press. But a new study found that now liberal justices also have little good to say about it. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Anna Moneymaker for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003r "
440		"    Question Looms on Biden's Climate Efforts: Is America's Word Good?  By Lisa Friedman  1,624 words 20 April 2021   12     After four years of ''America First,'' the president tries this week to reclaim U.S. leadership in the fight against climate change. Can the world trust his promises?  WASHINGTON -- President Biden faces a fundamental question as he convenes heads of state this week in a virtual summit to declare that the United States is ready to reclaim a leadership role in the fight against climate change: Is America's word still any good?  The question is dogging Mr. Biden as he tries to reassert the American role in other parts of the world stage after four years of Donald J. Trump's America First isolationism. Trading partners wonder how long a thaw on multilateral economic accords might last. Overtures to the trans-Atlantic alliance must overcome four years of Mr. Trump's NATO bashing.  And on Friday, China likened the United States' desire to rejoin the Paris Agreement global warming accord that Mr. Trump abandoned to a naughty child trying to sneak back into school after cutting class.  Perhaps nowhere is the skepticism about U.S. credibility as consequential as on the issue of climate change.  ''If America fails to lead the world on addressing the climate crisis, we won't have much of a world left,'' Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken warned on Monday in a speech that kicked off a weeklong climate push that culminates in the virtual Earth Day summit meeting Thursday and Friday.  The need for American leadership is enormous, a point Mr. Blinken emphasized in his address at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation Headquarters in Annapolis, Md., on the central place global warming would take in U.S. foreign policy.  And despite a four-year absence from the climate fight, Mr. Blinken said America would not shy from throwing its weight around in order to make sure other countries do more to cut their emissions. With other countries producing more than 80 percent of climate-warming pollution, he said, the United States has a duty to do so.  ''Our diplomats will challenge the practices of countries whose action, or inaction, is setting us back,'' Mr. Blinken said. ''When countries continue to rely on coal for a significant amount of their energy, or invest in new coal factories, or allow for massive deforestation, they will hear from the United States and our partners about how harmful these actions are.''  Some countries already are pushing back.  ''The U.S. chose to come and go as it likes with regard to the Paris Agreement,'' Zhao Lijian, the spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, said Friday in pointed remarks ahead of the summit. ''Its return is by no means a glorious comeback but rather the student playing truant getting back to class.''  Mr. Biden's global climate envoy, John Kerry, traveled last week to China, now the world's largest emitter, to try to convince Beijing's leaders to adopt new targets that are in line with the Paris Agreement goals of keeping global temperatures from rising above 1.5 degrees Celsius from preindustrial levels.  The meetings ended with an agreement to jointly cooperate on the climate crisis, but no promises of new targets. Mr. Zhao later told journalists that despite pushing China to do more, the United States ''has offered nothing on how it plans to make up for the lost four years.''  There is good reason for such skepticism. After all, Mr. Biden's summit marks the second time in a generation that the United States has re-entered climate negotiations after abandoning a global agreement to reduce planet-warming greenhouse gases.  Mr. Biden was vice president when the world applauded the Obama administration for resuming climate talks after his predecessor, George W. Bush, rejected the 1997 Kyoto Protocol climate treaty. Now he's trying to lead another comeback as the U.S. returns to the Paris Agreement that Mr. Trump deserted in a flashy show of defiance -- and perhaps hoping leaders don't remember the Obama administration's 2015 assurances that its climate policies could sustain a Republican administration.  ''Something countries of the world are very familiar with is this whiplash of going from a Republican to a Democratic to a Republican administration,'' said Robert N. Stavins, an environmental economist at Harvard University, adding, ''That goes to the heart of the long term credibility.''  Complicating those trust issues is the fact that, while the Biden administration may declare on Thursday that the United States is ''back,'' Congress remains as divided as ever on climate.  Mr. Biden is expected Thursday to announce a new U.S. target for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. How ambitious other countries feel America's new goal is, and how credible its path toward getting there is viewed, will largely determine how much the administration can prod other nations to make stronger commitments.  Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, has already said his party will oppose Mr. Biden's $2 trillion infrastructure plan, which is currently the cornerstone of the administration's efforts to meet current and future climate goals. A group of Republican House leaders last week also introduced legislation calling for a wholesale renegotiation of the Paris Agreement and denounced Mr. Biden's plans for global re-engagement.  ''Anyone who says the United States is united in working on climate change is drinking the Kool-Aid because we aren't,'' said Samantha Gross, director of the Energy Security and Climate Initiative at the Brookings Institution.  White House officials said this week the United States remained credible; America is still on track to meeting the Obama administration's goal of cutting economywide emissions about 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025, despite the Trump administration rollbacks.  But those numbers are arguable. This year, a study from the Rhodium Group did estimate that U.S. greenhouse gas emissions were about 21 percent below 2005 levels at the end of 2020 -- putting the country within striking distance of the Obama administration's pledge under the Paris Agreement. But about a third of that decline was because of the coronavirus pandemic, which sharply curtailed driving and business activity last year. Emissions will very likely rise again this year as the economy rumbles back to life unless policymakers enact significant new clean-energy policies, the study warned.  Ali A. Zaidi, the White House deputy climate adviser, pointed to another factor that should bolster U.S. credibility: American climate pledges go beyond the word of Washington. Yes, Mr. Trump abandoned the Paris Agreement. But, he said, ''our states and our cities and our businesses and our workers stayed in.''  Mr. Blinken said the United States would ''lead by example'' by investing heavily in clean energy. And he added a few warnings to nations he needs as climate partners. He did not name Brazil, but he warned that rainforest destruction would not be tolerated. And in an apparent message to China, he said cooperation on climate was not a ''chip'' countries could use to avoid scrutiny of ''bad behavior'' on human rights and other issues.  ''Climate is not a trading card, it's out future'' Mr. Blinken said.  Many diplomats said this time around they are more cleareyed about the ability of the United States to commit on climate change. But they were nevertheless inclined to give the Biden administration the benefit of the doubt.  ''I think on climate change the U.S. policy is viewed like a pendulum,'' Malik Amin Aslam, adviser to the Pakistani prime minister on climate change, said in an interview. Vulnerable countries are just ''happy that the Biden administration has put the pendulum in the right direction,'' he added.  Rondald J. Jumeau, a former ambassador of the Seychelles to the United Nations and a longtime climate change negotiator, said he was looking with ''qualified excitement'' to the Biden administration's announcements and hoped the United States could follow through, not only on emissions cuts but also finance to small island nations and other vulnerable countries.  In addition to rolling back climate regulations, Mr. Trump stopped payments to the Green Climate Fund to help poorer countries transition to clean energy and adapt to the consequences of climate change. Mr. Biden has vowed to restore funding, starting with $1.2 billion this year, subject to Congressional approval.  ''I think all of us know the American political system by now,'' Mr. Jumeau said. ''If we haven't learned during the Trump years, we'll never learn how dysfunctional it is.''  Adam S. Posen, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, said America's inconstancy on the world stage started long before Mr. Trump. From climate change to international development to trade laws, he said, allies have learned to live with the shifting priorities of Republicans and Democratic administrations as Congress remains largely unable to pass major policy into law.  ''Obviously, Trump made it worse because of incompetence and overt nationalism,'' he said.  The problem for the world is that, on global issues like climate change, America holds all the diplomatic cards.  ''The United States is big and rich and has a nuclear deterrent and two oceans, and there's not that many people who can impose consequences on the United States,'' Mr. Posen said. ''The consequences are the problems that don't get solved.''  Brad Plumer contributed reporting.  Brad Plumer contributed reporting.  President Biden will convene a virtual summit this week to show that the U.S. is ready to reassert itself on a range of subjects. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE new_york_times); Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken speaking at a news conference on Wednesday at NATO headquarters in Brussels. (POOL  BY JOHANNA GERON)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003o "
441		"    Coronavirus Update  By James Barron  1,001 words 20 April 2021   4     Now that all adults in the United States are eligible for coronavirus vaccines, will infections begin to drop?  That question loomed over a White House briefing on Monday, hours after the World Health Organization said that new cases of Covid-19 had increased last week for the eighth week in a row, with more than 5.2 million cases reported -- the most in a single week. Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director-general of the W.H.O., said that infections and hospitalizations among people ages 25 to 59 were increasing at an ''alarming rate.''  In the United States, universal adult eligibility became a reality as the last six states expanded eligibility just before the deadline that President Biden had sent. They are Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Oregon, Rhode Island and Vermont. At the current pace, the United States will vaccinate 70 percent of its population by mid-June.  But vaccine hesitancy has the potential to delay the moment when the coronavirus cannot spread easily because it cannot find people to infect. Officials are concerned that the pause in administration of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine over reports of rare blood clots could prompt unvaccinated people to avoid being inoculated.  Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said during the White House briefing that the agency was working to determine whether ''a handful'' of new, unconfirmed reports involved the same disorder. ''We are encouraged it has not been an overwhelming number,'' she said, ''but we are looking and seeing what has come in'' since the pause was announced last week.  As for whether increased vaccinations would lead to lower infections, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease expert, pointed to Israel, where, he said, about 62 percent of the population had been vaccinated. Israel lifted its outdoor mask mandate on Sunday, and schools reopened fully for the first time since September. ''Every day you get more and more people vaccinated, sooner or later, hopefully sooner, that level of infection will get lower,'' Dr. Fauci said during the briefing. ''And when it does, it gets easier and easier to get back to some degree of normality.''  Dr. Walensky referred to the ''interplay between how many people are vaccinated and how much disease is out there.'' She said the United States was making ''extraordinary strides'' in vaccinations. But with a seven-day average of more than 67,000 coronavirus cases on Sunday, according to a new_york_times database, ''we still have an extraordinary amount of disease out there.''  The United States also continues to add more vaccination sites. In New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio said the immense blue whale at the American Museum of Natural History would watch over vaccinations starting on Friday. The mayor also said that the city's seven-day average of positive test results was 4.91 percent on Monday, down from 6.64 percent at the beginning of April. And New York State said that starting on May 19, just in time for the N.B.A. playoffs, indoor arenas could fill 25 percent of their seats, up from 10 percent.  XXX  Australians and New Zealanders began traveling freely between the two countries on Monday for the first time in more than a year. Greece lifted quarantine restrictions for travelers from most European countries, as well as Israel and the United States -- if they can show that they have been vaccinated or have had a negative coronavirus test less than 72 hours before landing.  The travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand permitted reciprocal, quarantine-free passage. Most Australian states had forgone quarantines for travelers from New Zealand since late last year, but, until Monday, New Zealand had resisted giving Australians the same break. Some 568,000 people born in New Zealand live in Australia -- 2.3 percent of Australia's population, according to government statistics. More than 60,000 people born in Australia call New Zealand home, about 1.5 percent of the population.  ''We have genuinely missed our Australian cousins,'' Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand said, ''and that's because, in some cases, they are literally our cousins. That's certainly the case for me.''  But travel restrictions were tightened in other places on Monday. Hong Kong imposed a two-week ban on flights from India, Pakistan and the Philippines, where infections have skyrocketed.  The travel ban was imposed under a policy announced last week that allowed the government to block travel to contain the N501Y spike mutation, which has been found in a number of rapidly spreading variants, including B.1.1.7, first identified in Britain. The authorities in Hong Kong said the first case of the N501Y mutation involved a man who tested positive for it last week upon completing 21 days of quarantine. He had flown in from Dubai. On Sunday, a friend with whom he had stayed after his quarantine also tested positive for the virus, with a preliminary positive for the N501Y mutation. Other residents of the building where he had stayed tested negative, but the authorities ordered about 80 of them to quarantine at a government site.  In India, Delhi began a weeklong lockdown as the second wave of the coronavirus set records: More than 272,000 new cases were reported on Monday. Arvind Kejriwal, the chief minister of Delhi, said he had ''always been against lockdowns'' but relented because the health system had ''reached its limit.''  ''We have almost no I.C.U. beds left,'' he said. ''We are facing a huge shortage of oxygen.''  The worsening situation prompted Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain to cancel a long-planned trip to India next week. He said it was ''only sensible'' to postpone the visit, which would have been his first foreign trip since the pandemic began more than a year ago.  Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.  Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003j "
442		"    Will Humanities Benefit Future Doctors?  733 words 20 April 2021   24     Readers debate an Opinion writer's prescription of a larger dose of the liberal arts for medical students.  To the Editor:  Re ''A Dose of the Humanities,'' by Molly Worthen (Sunday Review, April 11):  Having recently retired after over 40 years in medical practice, I disagree with Dr. Worthen's view that medical students need more education in the humanities. In my experience, medical (and nursing) students tend to be among the kindest, most empathetic and most understanding people in any medical center.  The real problem comes years later: How do you keep ''the system'' (billing, charting, documenting, federal and state regulations, hospital committees, credentialing, malpractice, recertification, etc.) from beating it out of them?  Allan Bernstein  Rochester, N.Y.  To the Editor:  Molly Worthen is right on. As a teacher of medical students and undergraduates who aspire to go to medical school, I cannot count the number of times that students told me they wanted to become physicians because they loved science, and then, as first-year students, were surprised to learn that medicine is not science.  Before long they may discover the beauty of the ''art of medicine'' and the value of a broad education and experience for holistic healing of their patients, especially those who are ''off the curve.'' It helps negotiate the curves in life outside the white coat, too.  Sarah Hitchcock-DeGregori  Lenox, Mass.  The writer is professor emerita at the Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.  To the Editor:  We are distraught by ''A Dose of the Humanities.'' Medical students take humanities courses in college and will surely continue to appreciate pursuits such as literature, art and music in their lives. However, medical schools are already teaching less science than in past decades at a time when in fact there should be much more.  A warning to those advocating nontraditional medical school courses such as creative writing at the expense of science courses: When the next viral pandemic comes, instead of novel mRNA and viral vector-based vaccines in just one year, there will be more morbidity and mortality to write about.  Howard J. Worman  Carol E. Semrad  Dr. Worman is a professor of medicine at Columbia University. Dr. Semrad is a professor of medicine at the University of Chicago.  To the Editor:  I feel lucky that I went to a medical school where there was much more emphasis on the humanities than at others.  When I called families from the Covid-19 I.C.U. this winter, it mattered that I deeply cared about who the intubated and sedated patients were as humans. With one family, I chatted about their mother's love of classical music. With another, a wife told me about her husband's Harley-Davidson motorcycle.  I do wonder whether all doctors truly need an excellent humanities education and people skills, though. We might lose diversity and some brilliant folks if we choose only those medical students who like the humanities and who ''like people,'' as I do.  I have met some incredible doctors who have poor people skills or little interest in the humanities. While I read Tolstoy, they might be pushing neurosurgery or antibiotic development farther along through their research, leading to helping many more people than I could.  Over all, though, I feel that the trend for a humanities orientation in medical students is a very good thing. This is particularly critical as we become more and more interpreters of medical information and ''decision-making guides'' in an increasingly protocol-dependent and automated medical world. I just hope those with other gifts are still given opportunities to contribute, too.  Sean Legler  Minneapolis  The writer, a Harvard Medical School graduate, is an internist.  To the Editor:  I couldn't agree more with Molly Worthen's call for a more humanistic approach to caring for people. The osteopathic medical schools have been teaching this philosophy for more than 100 years. As an osteopathic-trained ob-gyn I use this philosophy in all my patient interactions every day.  Still, I see that some physicians treat patients as ''disease states,'' relying on tests for rigid diagnoses and treatments without understanding or caring much for context. Just a simple ''how are you doing?'' can be a powerful question if you really listen for the answer.  Gary J. Newman  Phoenix  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Soomin Jung FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003c "
443		"    Dodgers vs. Padres: '19 World Series Games'  By Scott Miller  1,768 words 20 April 2021   6     SAN DIEGO -- In April there is no red, white and blue bunting hanging anywhere quite yet, but you could have fooled San Diego's most enthusiastic baseball fans over the weekend. They streamed into the Gaslamp Quarter and Petco Park clothed in brown and mustard, limited only by their imaginations.  Baseball's most anticipated rivalry in 2021 -- the dominating, blue-blooded Los Angeles Dodgers and the class-climbing, blue-collar San Diego Padres -- began with a 12-inning bang on Friday; continued with a thriller on Saturday that culminated in a diving, fully extended, game-saving catch in center field by the Dodgers' Mookie Betts; and played through the Padres' stirring three-run eighth to avoid a sweep on Sunday.  The clubs move north to Dodger Stadium for four more games beginning on Thursday and, if the rest of their 16 games play out as the weekend's did, it is going to be some kind of fun.  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  ''We're going to get 19 World Series games this year,'' the Dodgers star Justin Turner said enthusiastically this spring. The taut games over the weekend in San Diego made him look prophetic.  ''They definitely feel like they're postseason games, that type of atmosphere,'' said Eric Hosmer, the Padres' first baseman who helped lead Kansas City to consecutive World Series appearances in 2014 and 2015 (and the title in 2015). His R.B.I. single on Sunday put San Diego ahead for good in a 5-2 win.  ''I think it's no secret that all of the baseball world was locked into this series,'' he said.  The weekend was stuffed with Cy Young Award winners (Clayton Kershaw, Blake Snell, Trevor Bauer and David Price) and near-misses (Yu Darvish finished second in the N.L. last summer and second in the A.L. in 2013). It spotlighted the 2018 A.L. Most Valuable Player Award winner (Betts) and the second-, third- and fourth-place finishers in the N.L. M.V.P. voting last summer (Betts, Manny Machado, Fernando Tatis Jr.). Another M.V.P. winner (Cody Bellinger, N.L. 2019) missed the series because he is on the injured list.  The Dodgers have won eight consecutive N.L. West titles and are heavy favorites to add a ninth this year. The Padres, now in their 53rd season, have won a grand total of five division titles -- and zero since 2006. But in trading for the starters Snell, Darvish and Joe Musgrove within a buzzy three-week span over the winter, the Padres closed the gap enough that, shortly afterward, the Dodgers struck a three-year, $102 million deal with Bauer.  ''Obviously, we've noticed,'' Andrew Friedman, the Dodgers' president of baseball operations, said of the Padres' ascendancy.  Not that Los Angeles wants to keep talking about it. Manager Dave Roberts downplayed the hype on Friday. ''It's going to be a fun series, a fun game,'' he said. ''I'm not going to make too much out of one game, one series.''  Then came 12 innings and nearly five hours of sheer drama in the first game of the series. Hosmer knocked in Machado with two strikes and two outs in the ninth to push the game into extra innings. The benches cleared in the 10th inning when Jorge Mateo and Dennis Santana had words after the Dodgers pitcher hit Mateo with a pitch.  It was a night that started with a pregame ceremony honoring the local kid, Musgrove, who had thrown the first no-hitter in Padres history a week earlier. Then, in a beautiful display of baseball's unpredictability, it ended with Musgrove playing left field after Padres Manager Jayce Tingler burned through his pitchers to the point where he had to move infielder Jake Cronenworth to the mound.  Naturally, Cronenworth, who was a college closer at Michigan but was making his first major league pitching appearance, struck out Betts.  Price, who drove in a run with a sacrifice fly in the 12th, had the unusual combination of a victory, four strikeouts and an R.B.I. The last Dodgers player with a line like that in an extra-inning game was Nap Rucker on July 9, 1915, according to Stats L.L.C.  Afterward, Roberts, who had been reluctant to make too much of one game, or one series, gushed.  ''It was like a playoff game,'' Roberts said. ''The crowd was great. I'm just spent emotionally.''  Of course, you couldn't blame Roberts for his initial hesitancy to legitimize this as a true rivalry. While the Dodgers and Padres have produced much entertainment over the years, little of it has had to do with actual title chases. The Padres, born into the N.L. as an expansion franchise in 1969, have finished north of .500 in just 15 seasons. These Southern California neighbors have battled down to the season's final day just twice in half a century.  ''We came to San Diego with a little bit of a chip on our shoulder regarding Los Angeles,'' said Larry Lucchino, who was the Padres' chief executive and president from 1995 to 2001 and played a key role in the construction of Petco Park. ''The reason was the Dodgers kind of resented the Padres' presence, even their existence.''  He added of San Diego: ''They thought of it as an adjunct territory to their territory.''  The Dodgers barely seemed to know the Padres existed until 1982, when Dodgers pitcher Tom Niedenfuer hit Joe Lefebvre in the head with a pitch, and Kurt Bevacqua, a key reserve for San Diego, accused Dodgers Manager Tommy Lasorda of ordering it, referring to him as a ''fat little Italian.''  Lasorda responded with a veritable spray chart of expletives, saying Bevacqua couldn't hit water if he fell out of a boat and that he would gladly send a limousine to drive the infielder to the park to make sure his weak bat was in the lineup.  ''I found the audio of that whole thing really hilarious,'' said Bevacqua, who two years later would hit the first World Series home run in Padres' history.  ''The whole thing was, in '82 we weren't that good,'' Bevacqua said. ''In '83 we started to get a little better and, you know, here comes Garv.''  Garv as in Steve Garvey, the Dodgers star who the Padres poached before the 1983 season. His iconic home run lifted the team to its first World Series in 1984.  Moments of San Diego baseball superiority have been fleeting. But along with the poaching of Garvey, the Padres have mastered the art of trolling the Dodgers.  In 1999, they greeted Kevin Brown, the ace of their World Series team in 1998, with a Wall Street-flavored playlist after he spurned San Diego to become baseball's first $100-million man in Los Angeles.  The Padres took the teasing to another level in 2000 when the new general manager of the Dodgers, Kevin Malone, declared there was a ''new sheriff in town.'' The Padres responded with the cover of their media guide featuring then-owner John Moores, Lucchino, General Manager Kevin Towers and Manager Bruce Bochy decked out in Western gear, posing in front of a ''jail'' at a theme park in Arizona.  The Padres have been unable to detain -- or even deter -- the Dodgers since. When Los Angeles swept San Diego in a division series in October, the Padres were making their first postseason appearance since 2006.  ''It's a little early, I think, to call it a rivalry,'' said Charley Steiner, a Dodgers radio broadcaster. ''A budding rivalry might be a little more accurate.''  The pieces certainly are in place. The Dodgers maintain the game's highest payroll at $237 million, while the Padres rank eighth with a franchise-record $180 million. Of seven stratospheric, $300 million-plus contracts in the game, three of those players were on the field this weekend: Betts (12 years, $365 million), Machado (10 years, $300 million) and Tatis Jr. (14 years, $340 million), two of whom, fairly shockingly, play for the Padres.  ''That latter point is a significant one,'' said Lucchino, the man who called the Yankees the Evil Empire after becoming the Red Sox president and chief executive in 2001.  In many ways, this arms race is reminiscent of the Yankees-Red Sox rivalry in the 2000s: The Yankees had won four World Series titles in five years. The Red Sox, who had not won one since 1918, knew they had to build a team capable of beating the Yankees. While the Dodgers' title last year was their first since 1988, they have played in three of the past four World Series.  ''Now let's see what the Padres can do over a sustained period of time,'' Steiner said.  After the wild 11-6 marathon on Friday, Kershaw and Darvish produced a riveting, old-fashioned pitchers' duel in the Dodgers' 2-0 win on Saturday. That pushed the Dodgers to 13-2, the best 15-game start for a defending World Series champion. In winning on Sunday, the Padres at least earned a few smiles.  The Dodgers are now 96-47 against the Padres dating to 2013. And this L.A. team reminds Steiner of his previous radio stop.  ''Like the Yankees, the guts of the team is essentially the same,'' Steiner said. ''You had Jeter, Bernie, Posada, Mariano, they were the guts of that team for so long. Now, the Dodgers have essentially the guts of a team that has gone 60 games over .500 over the last 162 games. It's basically the same team with some valuable additions. San Diego is still adding, trying to figure out how good it can be.''  Now San Diego will try to do what Lasorda once said Bevacqua couldn't.  One of San Diego's original Dodgers haters, Bevacqua, who has never owned a boat, chuckled and offered a parting shot: ''The boats I have fallen out of or jumped out of, I've hit water every time.''  Follow Scott Miller on Twitter: @ScottMillerBBL  Fernando Tatis Jr. of the Padres was brushed back early in Friday's loss; the benches later cleared. Fans of the Padres, far left, and the Dodgers near Petco Park in San Diego got into the spirit of the three-game series.; Max Muncy scoring for the Dodgers. The series, in which the Padres won once, had four Cy Young Award winners. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ARIANA DREHSLER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00049 "
444		"    Looted Objects From Afghanistan Are Returned  By Tom Mashberg  593 words 20 April 2021 The new_york_times NYTF The new_york_times on the Web     Thirty-three antiquities were handed over to the Afghan ambassador by the Manhattan district attorney's office and the Department of Homeland Security.  For half a century, through war, anarchy and upheaval, Afghanistan has been stripped of tens of thousands of Buddhist and Hindu antiquities, some dating back more than 1,800 years.  Many of those items entered the Western market in the 1990s and early 2000s, St John Simpson, a curator at the British Museum, told The new_york_times last month. ''And all of those,'' he said, ''were almost certainly illegally exported or stolen.''  On Monday, 33 of those antiquities, valued at $1.8 million, were handed over to the Afghan ambassador, Roya Rahmani, by the Manhattan district attorney's office and the Department of Homeland Security, at a ceremony in New York.  The artifacts were part of a hoard of 2,500 objects valued at $143 million seized in a dozen raids between 2012 and 2014 from Subhash Kapoor, a disgraced Manhattan art dealer currently jailed in India on smuggling and theft charges.  Upon receiving the items, many of them delicate heads made from stucco, clay and a soft stone known as schist, a grateful Ms. Rahmani nonetheless warned that ''the environment that allows for the plundering of Afghanistan's treasured antiquities is the same environment that allows for the perpetuation of conflict.''  ''Traffickers are not just robbing Afghanistan of its history,'' she added. ''They are perpetuating a situation where peace does not manifest and the region does not stabilize. Looting Afghanistan's past is looting Afghanistan's future.''  Much of the destruction and plunder of Afghan relics and religious icons took place under the Taliban, who destroyed the famed sixth-century Buddhas of Bamiyan, a pair of enormous carvings, in 2001. In the face of near-universal condemnation, officials dynamited the works, which stood in tall niches hewed from a sheer sandstone cliff.  The objects repatriated on Monday will be housed in the National Museum in Kabul. Afghan officials have said they were confident they could now safeguard their museums and cultural institutions against plunder and smuggling.  According to UNESCO, ''the Afghan authorities have taken important steps'' to prevent the theft, smuggling and desecration of cultural objects. Those steps include a separate new police force tasked with protecting cultural sites, up-to-date museum security systems, and educational campaigns aimed at convincing anyone who finds lost or forgotten relics to turn them over to the government.  During the ceremony, the Afghan ambassador praised the office of the district attorney, Cy Vance Jr., for arranging the return. Mr. Vance's Antiquities Trafficking Unit, overseen by the Assistant District Attorney Matthew Bogdanos, said that over the past decade, it has recovered several thousand stolen antiquities collectively valued at more than $175 million, from more than a dozen nations.  Since August, the unit has overseen the return of 338 objects to seven nations, among them Nepal, Sri Lanka, Egypt and Pakistan, with more to be sent back once the countries involved resolve travel and transport issues related to the pandemic.  Crimes involving looted and stolen religious relics, Mr. Vance said, ''not only tear at the societal fabric of nations but also deprive millions of believers worldwide of the earliest sacred symbols of their faith.''  A bronze mask of Silenus, circa 2nd Century, was among the objects handed over to Afghanistan in a ceremony on Monday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY via Manhattan District Attorney's Office FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003h "
445		"    Abandoning Afghanistan Is A Huge Error  By Bret Stephens  1,008 words 20 April 2021   25     Leaving proves Osama bin Laden right: Eventually, America cuts and runs.  I once boarded a flight from Dubai to Kabul alongside a team of Afghan soccer players -- teenage girls in red uniforms, chatting and laughing much as they might have anywhere else in the world. I thought of those players again after President Biden announced plans for America's complete military withdrawal from Afghanistan.  I hope they have the means to get out before the Taliban take over again, as sooner or later will most likely happen.  The United States did not go into Afghanistan after 9/11 to improve the status of women. We did so anyway. Millions of girls, whom the Taliban had forbidden to get any kind of education, went to school. Some of them -- not nearly enough, but impressive considering where they started from and the challenges they faced -- became doctors, entrepreneurs, members of Parliament. A few got to watch their daughters play soccer under the protective shield of Pax Americana.  Those women are now being abandoned. So is every Afghan who struggled to make the country a more humane, hospitable, ethnically and socially tolerant place -- some by taking immense personal risks to help U.S. troops, diplomats and aid workers do their jobs. As George Packer writes in The Atlantic, there are some 17,000 such Afghans waiting for the wheels of U.S. bureaucracy to turn so they can get their visas.  If Joe Biden wants to distinguish his immigration policy from that of his predecessor, he should sign an executive order to grant every one of those visa applications. Quickly. It would lift the death sentence that now lies on their heads. It would be in the best American tradition of welcoming political refugees from places like Hungary, Cuba, Vietnam, the Soviet Union and northern Iraq. And it would send the useful signal that helping America when America asks isn't the dumbest thing a person can do.  But those 17,000 are still a tiny fraction of who we are leaving behind. There's a rational argument to be made that the United States went into Afghanistan to serve our national interests, coldly considered, and not the needs of an impoverished country of nearly 40 million people. Foreign policy is ultimately about self-interest, not the interests of others.  But what was the American interest in staying in Afghanistan beyond the fall of the Taliban? It wasn't, centrally, to kill Osama bin Laden, who was just one in a succession of terrorist masterminds. It was to prove Bin Laden wrong about America's long-term commitments, especially overseas.  In August 1996, Bin Laden issued his notorious fatwa declaring a war on the United States that he hoped would be long and bloody. He observed that, in one conflict after another, the Americans always cut and run. ''God has dishonored you when you withdrew,'' Bin Laden wrote, ''and it clearly showed your weaknesses and powerlessness.''  The attacks of Sept. 11 were a direct consequence of that observation. That's why Barack Obama was right when, during his first campaign for the presidency, he called Afghanistan ''a war that we have to win.'' To lose would not just demonstrate our weaknesses and powerlessness. It would be a vindication of the strategy of jihad. How safe will America be when that strategy succeeds not only in Kabul but also in Islamabad?  The rejoinder is that we can't endlessly fight other people's wars for them, especially when we have to shift our strategic focus to competitors like Russia and China. This is a factual falsehood compounded by a conceptual one.  In January alone, 239 Afghan members of pro-government security forces and 77 civilians were killed by the Taliban. By contrast, the U.S. has lost fewer than 20 service members annually in hostile engagements in Afghanistan since 2015. That's heartbreaking for those affected, but tiny next to the number of troops who die in routine training accidents worldwide. Our main role in recent years has been to provide Afghan forces with effective air power. It is not an exorbitant price to pay to avert an outright Taliban victory.  As for Russia and China, should Ukrainians -- who now face 150,000 Russian military troops massing on their border -- find comfort in the looming Afghan pullout? What about Taiwanese, facing increasing belligerence from Beijing?  The theory of deterrence relies not just on the balance of forces but also on reserves of credibility. Leaving Afghanistan now does next to nothing to change the former while seriously depleting the latter. We are extending our 50-year streak from Vietnam, to Somalia, to Iraq, of being at least as dangerous to our friends as we are to our enemies.  There's a view that to ask Afghans to fend for themselves after 20 years of American sacrifice shouldn't be seen as unreasonable. But foreign policy is also about dealing with the world as it is, not as we wish it would be. In the wished-for world, Afghan leaders wouldn't be inept, Afghan women wouldn't be in increased peril, the Taliban would have severed their links to international terrorists, and what the U.S. did in one corner of the world would have no bearing on how it's seen elsewhere.  In the world as it is, none of that is true, and we have to find a way of advancing our interests without betraying our values and our friends. Last week's calamitous decision on Afghanistan fails that test on every front.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Moises Saman/Magnum Photos FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003g "
446		"    Trapped in Brazil's Covid Tragedy  By Vanessa Barbara  990 words 20 April 2021   25     We spend our days watching ambulances, as Covid-19 rips through the country.  SÃO PAULO, Brazil -- From the balcony of my apartment, I can see an ambulance parking lot. For over a year now, my 2½-year-old daughter and I have been monitoring -- avidly, anxiously -- the movements of the 10 ambulances parked there. That's the sort of entertainment we have now.  ''Look, another one is getting back!'' she says, pointing at an ambulance as it stops and turns off its red-and-white lights. It's not exactly rigorous analysis, I know, but I judge the severity of the pandemic by looking at this parking lot. Since the beginning of the year, fewer and fewer ambulances stay put. Now, during the day, it's common to see only one or two vehicles at the lot -- and never for long. Just wait awhile and away they go, sirens blaring, to answer someone's call.  Official statistics confirm our observations. In the state of São Paulo, where I live along with 46 million others, the rate of Covid-19 hospitalizations more than doubled in the four weeks from Feb. 21 to March 21. At the beginning of April, an average of 3,025 people were being admitted daily to a hospital -- a rise of 58 percent from the start of the previous month. I try to explain to my daughter, in a lighthearted way, that these ambulances are transporting sick people to the hospital, where they are going to take some fruit-flavored medicine and get better very quickly.  Looking at that incessant parade of ambulances, I try not to sound desperate. I try to keep from my voice the knowledge that 543 people have died waiting for a hospital bed since the end of February in São Paulo alone, that across the country over 370,000 people have lost their lives -- and that the worst may be yet to come. (After all, in the Southern Hemisphere, winter is just around the corner.) But I can't hide the impotence and anger I feel, trapped in a small apartment for who knows how much longer, watching the tragedy unfold.  There was one glorious intermission, though. In early February, my husband and I enrolled our daughter in a private school with plenty of trees and fresh air. The classrooms are spacious and airy, and many lessons are held outdoors. I've never seen her so happy. Her social and emotional development soared. She sang randomly and chatted about her new friends.  But in early March, she tested positive for the coronavirus. She had mild symptoms: low fever, a runny nose, a cough. We gave her 14 drops of acetaminophen, which she doesn't love, once every six hours, for three days. She dutifully complied. Her classmates and teachers also entered a 14-day isolation, although nobody else tested positive. She quickly recovered; my husband and I tested negative. We couldn't trace the source of her illness, though we assume it must have been someone at the school. ''An immaculate infection!'' my husband joked.  By the time our quarantine ended, in mid-March, São Paulo's governor had declared a state of emergency, closing all schools. The virus was ripping through the country, claiming a record number of lives. A friend of mine who works as a nurse said that it was now common to see a traffic jam of ambulances in front of hospitals. Outside our apartment, the parking lot was bustling.  It was an entirely foreseeable escalation. Since the virus reached Brazil in March last year, we've never really had a proper lockdown, regionally or nationally. While state governors and city mayors have tried to institute some restrictions, President Jair Bolsonaro has consistently advocated the free circulation of people -- and, consequently, the virus.  The results could not be starker: There are on average around 3,000 deaths per day, a staggering number spurred by a new, more contagious variant of the coronavirus. Of daily Covid-19 deaths worldwide, Brazil currently accounts for almost a third. In dozens of states, I.C.U.s are 90 percent or more full. Calamity doesn't begin to cover it.  The vaccination rollout, chaotic at first, is still slow. My 72-year-old father finally received his second dose 10 days ago; my 67-year-old mother just got her first shot last week. Only 4.5 percent of the population is fully immunized, compared with 25 percent in the United States. Our public health system is capable of doing much more, but we simply don't have enough vaccines. We shall never forget that last year Mr. Bolsonaro's government turned down an offer of 70 million vaccine doses from Pfizer.  Many other countries are beginning to emerge from the crisis, while ours plunges ever deeper into catastrophe. But Mr. Bolsonaro -- who has actively discouraged social distancing, tests and vaccines -- couldn't care less. ''Enough fussing and whining,'' he said in March. ''How much longer will the crying go on?''  Without the vaccines or political will to curb the virus, we don't have many options left. We can't take to the streets to protest -- at least not without a high risk of infection -- and the next election is a year and a half away. More than 370,000 Brazilians are gone forever. As for the rest of us, we continue to live as prisoners in our own homes, watching the ambulances go by.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Christina Hägerfors FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003i "
447		"   LETTER  I'm Karen. Don't Insult Me.  145 words 20 April 2021   24     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  Re ''I'm the Head of Planned Parenthood. We're Done Making Excuses for Our Founder'' (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, April 17):  I have always been a big supporter of Planned Parenthood, but after reading Alexis McGill Johnson's article about Margaret Sanger, I am really disappointed. Ms. McGill Johnson repeatedly used my name, Karen, as a reference to bad people. Horrible people. She has bought into the grade-school mentality that has perpetrated this insult.  Well, other Karens and I have had it.  Ms. McGill Johnson advocates for reproductive freedom for all. How about freedom from juvenile insults involving your name? I have always loved my name, so there.  Karen Roy  Napa, Calif.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Valerie Chiang; Photo: Bettmann/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003b "
448		"    There Could Never Be a Female Andrew Yang  By Michelle Goldberg  959 words 20 April 2021   24     No woman with his résumé would have a chance of becoming New York's mayor.  There is an adage that men are judged on their potential and women on their accomplishments.  A 2019 study in Frontiers in Psychology showed how this can work in the business world. Participants were asked to weigh four candidates, two men and two women, for a job at a fictitious company. One man and one woman had résumés and recommendations emphasizing their past achievements. The other man and woman had résumés and testimonials foregrounding their abilities and leadership potential.  In two different experiments, groups of participants were asked whom they'd hire. In each, the perception of potential was an advantage for men, but not for women. The experiments didn't show pure sexism: In one, the participants thought the women would be better hires overall. But they did show that women were judged on what they'd already done, while men were judged on what people thought they could do in the future.  Other research shows that men are more likely than women to be viewed as inspired. In 2017, The Harvard Business Review reported on a study revealing that men, but not women, gain leadership status at work for promoting ideas seen as helping the group. A 2015 study found that ''a man is ascribed more creativity than a woman when they produce identical output.'' Women can be workhorses, but rarely wunderkinds.  This helps explain why there could never be a female Andrew Yang.  In the latest round of polling for New York's Democratic mayoral primary, Yang continues to lead. A Spectrum News NY1/Ipsos poll shows him with 22 percent of likely Democratic voters, followed by the Brooklyn borough president, Eric Adams, with 13 percent. The progressive polling firm Data for Progress shows Yang with 26 percent, double Adams's 13 percent. A survey by the Siena College Research Institute and AARP has Yang leading with voters over 50, getting 24 percent of the vote, followed by Adams and the city comptroller, Scott Stringer, who each get 13 percent.  You might notice that neither Maya Wiley nor Kathryn Garcia are among the top three, despite their obvious qualifications. On paper, Wiley looks like the perfect candidate to recreate the coalition that elected Mayor Bill de Blasio. A mediagenic former MSNBC commentator, she served as both counsel to de Blasio and chairwoman of the city's police oversight agency. She is a progressive Black woman with an Elizabeth Warren-like arsenal of plans.  Kathryn Garcia is the former commissioner for the New York City Sanitation Department and should be an obvious choice for those who care most about competent crisis management. As a City & State article noted recently, she has a ''reputation as a go-to fixer, called upon to tackle challenges like lead exposure in children and delivering meals during the Covid-19 pandemic.''  There are plenty of reasons beyond gender that neither woman has yet broken through. Wiley, despite her cable news experience, has been an uneven communicator; there's a sentence on her website that says, ''The tinkering treadmill of incrementalism must give way to the transformational.'' Garcia's name recognition is low -- just 29 percent in a poll from last month.  But they're also running at a time of understandable disenchantment with city governance. Last month, Yang's pollsters asked New York voters what they wanted in a mayor, giving them seven options, all worded positively. The top two responses were ''a unifier who can bring the city together'' and ''a visionary who can figure out what it'll take for N.Y.C. to recover from Covid.'' Third was ''a manager who understands city government.'' Dead last was ''a public servant who has spent their life working for others.''  Unfortunately, women are rarely seen as visionaries. It's impossible to imagine any woman traveling the path of, say, Pete Buttigieg, from mayor of the fourth-largest city in Indiana to credible presidential candidate to cabinet secretary. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is one of the great political talents of her generation, but I doubt she'd be taken seriously if she ran for New York mayor, despite being far more politically experienced than Yang. One woman in the mayoral race is running a left-wing outsider campaign, a former public-school teacher and nonprofit executive named Dianne Morales. In the Data for Progress poll, she's at 3 percent.  Writing in The New Republic, Alex Pareene contrasted Yang with Cynthia Nixon, a celebrity with a deep history of civic engagement whose 2018 primary challenge of Gov. Andrew Cuomo ''never stood a chance.'' Yang's innovation, Pareene wrote, was to ''become a celebrity by running for president,'' legitimizing himself by sharing a stage with the leaders of the Democratic Party. It's a good point, but it leaves out what is probably an even more salient difference between Yang and Nixon.  Male candidates can embody possibility and run as repositories for people's diffuse hopes. Women usually have to pay their dues. It creates a double bind. There's never been a female mayor of New York City, but that doesn't make it any easier for a woman to be the candidate of change.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Adam Pape for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00038 "
449		"    A Rebound Is Expected In Corporate Earnings  By Matt Phillips  586 words 20 April 2021   3     Market analysts are almost universally bullish on corporate earnings, but that exuberance might already be baked into stock prices.  First-quarter earnings season picks up steam this week, with analysts expecting that profits for S&P 500 companies rose roughly 27 percent in the three months through March, compared with a year earlier, when the pandemic sent corporate earnings into a tailspin.  Companies such as Netflix, AT&T and American Express are all slated to issue results this week, offering a relatively well-rounded look at the state of corporate America in the early days of what could be a powerful year for the U.S. economy. It might also help set expectations for the stock market, after a big rally already this year.  The consensus among 76 economists polled by Bloomberg is that gross domestic product will expand 6.2 percent in 2021, which would make it the best year for economic growth since 1984. And sentiment among analysts covering the stock market is almost universally bullish, given that strong economic tailwind.  ''You'd almost have to be self-deceiving to expect U.S. companies over all to underperform consensus, given how the macro backdrop is driving revenues so well,'' wrote John Vail, chief global strategist at Nikko Asset Management.  The expectations for profit growth are even more elevated for the current quarter: Analysts expect that in the three months that end in June, companies in the S&P 500 will notch a 54-percent rise in profits, compared with a year ago.  That increase, of course, reflects a rebound from the worst of the pandemic-bred downturn. But it also is a result of ''economic re-acceleration, and a rebound in commodity prices,'' said Jonathan Golub, a stock market analyst at Credit Suisse.  Of course, if everyone is expecting such a surge in profits, the good news could already be fully incorporated into stock prices -- and that means anything short of perfect results would make for a difficult stretch for stocks.  That has certainly been the case with some of the banks that reported earnings last week. Shares of Morgan Stanley, for example, dropped on Friday even though the bank reported record revenue and profit. On Monday, investors greeted better-than-expected results from warehouse company Prologis the same way.  The S&P 500 is already up nearly 11 percent in 2021, and climbed to yet another record high on Friday.  That could mean the market is due for a pullback anyway. The index is relatively expensive by metrics such as the price-to-earnings ratio, which compares stock prices as a share of expected corporate profits over the next 12 months.  The S&P 500 is trading at nearly 23 times expected earnings. That's roughly the valuation the index has held for most of the past year, but it's very high by historical standards.  Over the last 20 years, the S&P 500 has traded at an average of 16 times expected earnings.  By comparison, a valuation of 23 times expected earnings is closer to where stock market valuations stood at the tail end of the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s. When that ended, the S&P 500 fell roughly 50 percent before it hit bottom.  Coca-Cola, United Airlines, Netflix, AT&T and American Express are expected to issue earnings results this week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Scott Olson/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00037 "
450		"   LETTER  Insight Into Wisdom  108 words 20 April 2021   24     Summary summary summary  To the Editor:  Re ''Wisdom Isn't What You Think It Is'' (column, April 16):  David Brooks's understanding of wisdom resonates with me. After 88 years of life and 48 years of practicing yoga daily, I feel very comfortable with his point of view. I have made lots of mistakes but have had many more successes.  I have always paid attention to one of my teacher's sayings: ''It's a good day to fail; that's when you really learn something.''  Edward J. Wardwell  Oberlin, Ohio  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Hetherington/Trunk Archive FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0003a "
451		"    Marie Supikova, 88, Witness at Nuremberg After Nazi Terror, Dies  By Richard Sandomir  1,115 words 20 April 2021   22     The men of Lidice, including her father, were massacred and the women, including her mother, sent to a concentration camp. She later testified at the Nuremberg war-crimes trials.  Marie Supikova, who survived the Nazis' massacre and destruction of her Czech village and testified about those horrors at the Nuremberg war-crimes trials when she was 15, died on March 22 in Prague. She was 88.  Hana Pokorna, a friend, confirmed the death and said that Mrs. Supikova had had breathing problems and Alzheimer's disease and had recently overcome Covid-19.  Mrs. Supikova was 10 when German forces arrived in Lidice, a village of about 500, on June 9, 1942. They were bent on avenging an attack by Czech parachutists on Reinhard Heydrich, a principal architect of the ''final solution,'' the Nazis' plan to annihilate the Jewish people, which led to his death on June 4.  Looking to eradicate Lidice (pronounced LID-it-seh), the Germans destroyed all the village's buildings and killed nearly 200 men, including Mrs. Supikova's father, by firing squad, against a barn wall cushioned by mattresses. The women, including Mrs. Supikova's mother, were sent to the Ravensbrück concentration camp in Germany.  In a poem published shortly after the massacre, Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote, in part:  The whole world holds in his arms today  The murdered village of Lidice,  As the murdered body of a young child  Happy and innocent, caught in the game,  The murdered body colored, and violated,  Tortured and mutilated, of a helpless child.  Lidice's children, Marie among them, were sent first to nearby Kladno, where they were locked in a school gymnasium with the women of the village for three days. They were then moved to Lodz, Poland, where the children were taken to an old factory that served as a detention facility.  There were more than 80 children ''with lice, hungry and longing for home,'' Mrs. Supikova told Czech Radio, adding, ''We were alone and didn't know what to do.''  She was one of seven children chosen because of their appearance to be re-educated as Germans. The others were sent to gas chambers. The seven were moved to a school near Poznan, Poland, where they stayed for about a year until they were adopted by German couples.  Her new parents, Alfred and Ilsa Schiller, gave Marie a new name, Ingeborg Schiller, and a tiny room behind the kitchen in their home in Poznan. In an article in The New Yorker in 1948, Mrs. Supikova recalled that the Schillers had argued about her presence in the household.  ''You and your Party friends!'' she quoted Mrs. Schiller as saying. ''Why did they pick you to take this girl?''  Mr. Schiller, she said, shouted back, ''They have ordered us to make a German woman out of her, and we are going to do it.''  They ordered her to speak only German and told her never to mention Lidice.  ''If I ever hear the word 'Lidice' in my house, I will beat you half dead,'' she said her adoptive mother had told her.  She had a more pleasant recollection of her time with the Schillers when she was interviewed by The Los Angeles Times in 1981.  ''They treated me very well,'' she said. ''There was even a measure of love between us. Of course, I didn't know what had happened to my family until after the war. The Germans had told us that our parents had died natural deaths and that we were orphans.''  Marie Dolezalova was born in Lidice on Aug. 22, 1932. Her father, Josef Dolezal, was an ironworker. Her mother, Alzbeta (Kaclova) Dolezalova, was a homemaker.  Marie remained with the Schillers for three years, until a Czech organization looking for the dispersed children of Lidice found her in 1946, and the Schillers had to surrender her. But she faced a new reality: Her father was dead, as was her brother, who had been killed at a shooting range in Prague for lying to the Germans about his age.  And her mother was dying of tuberculosis.  ''We recognized each other instantly, but we couldn't talk to each other because I spoke only German and had forgotten the Czech language,'' Mrs. Supikova said of their reunion in an interview with BBC Radio in 2012. ''We had to have a translator from Lidice who helped us to talk, and my mother told me that she always believed I had lived, and that she would see me again.''  After her mother's death in Prague in late 1946, Marie went to live with an aunt in Kladno. She graduated from a nursing school in Ostrava.  She bore witness to her Holocaust experience when she testified in October 1947 at the Nuremberg trial of members of the SS Race and Resettlement Main Office. Then only 15, Marie was one of three people -- two teenagers and one middle-aged woman -- to testify that day about the massacre and their lives afterward.  By the mid-1950s, she was married to Frantisek Supik, adopting the feminine version of his surname, and had a daughter, Ivana. They moved from Ostrava to Lidice, which was being rebuilt, in 1955. There she took on a series of local administrative jobs and was the secretary of the Lidice National Committee, which took care of the operation and maintenance of the village.  And she continued to tell her story, often to children.  In July 2018, she and her great-granddaughter, Karolina, then 10, laid a bouquet on the gymnasium floor of the high school in Kladno to mark the location where the Gestapo separated Marie from her mother in 1942.  In addition to her daughter and her great-granddaughter, Mrs. Supikova is survived by two grandchildren and three great-grandsons. Her husband, a roofer, died in 1990.  Before her mother died, Mrs. Supikova took her daughter to the ruins of Lidice.  ''She told Marie, 'We're going to see your father,''' said Elizabeth Clark, a retired journalism lecturer at Texas State University, San Marcos, who is writing about Lidice for a faculty writing project. ''Marie didn't understand at first that they were going to the mass grave where he had been buried.''  Marie Supikova in 2019 in Lidice, Czech Republic, at a ceremony observing the 77th anniversary of the destruction of the village by Nazi forces. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAELA RIHOVA/CTK, VIA AP IMAGES); Mrs. Supikova, then known as Marie Dolezalova, testified during the Nuremberg war-crimes trials in 1947, when she was 15. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HEDWIG WACHENHEIMER EPSTEIN, VIA UNITED STATES HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00034 "
452		"    Insider Is Latest News Site To Join Unionization Wave  By Katie Robertson  352 words 20 April 2021   3     Journalists at Insider, the news site formerly called Business Insider, said on Monday that they had formed a union, joining a wave that has swept digital media companies.  A majority of more than 300 editorial workers, a group that includes reporters, editors and video journalists, voted in support, union representatives said.  Insider, which changed its name this year, was co-founded by Henry Blodget in 2007 as a business-focused publication with an emphasis on the tech industry. In recent years, it has expanded its areas of coverage.  Axel Springer, a digital publishing company based in Berlin, paid $343 million for a 97 percent stake in the company in 2015 and bought the remaining 3 percent in 2018. Mr. Blodget stayed on as chief executive. Insider, which has grown during the pandemic, bumped up the minimum annual salary for staff members to $60,000 in February.  The Insider Union is asking the company for voluntary recognition. It is represented by the NewsGuild of New York, which also represents editorial employees at The new_york_times and other publications.  ''I've seen how we've moved from the start-up energy of a young company into a much larger, much more formal corporation,'' said Kim Renfro, an entertainment correspondent who has worked at Insider since 2014. ''I see the union as being a natural part of that progress.''  William Antonelli, an editor at Insider, said the union would focus on diversity and inclusion, pay equity, and more transparency on how company executives rate employees.  Nicholas Carlson, Insider's global editor in chief, said in a statement: ''The satisfaction, job security and happiness of our journalists is extremely important to us. We will fully respect whatever decision our newsroom ultimately makes.''  The formation of a union at Insider followed organizing efforts at BuzzFeed News, Vice, The New Yorker and Vox Media. Last week, a group of more than 650 tech workers at The Times formed a union.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00039 "
453		"    Watching the Trial and Reliving Their Own Nightmare  By Nilo Tabrizy and Débora Souza Silva  874 words 20 April 2021   14     ''I don't watch the footage of my dad's incident because it is torture,'' said Lora Dene King, whose father, Rodney G. King, was brutally beaten by the police in Los Angeles. ''Here it is 30 years later and nothing has changed.''  At a friend's home in Long Beach, Calif., Ms. King watched the trial of Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer accused of murdering George Floyd in May. A video of Mr. Chauvin kneeling on Mr. Floyd's neck went viral on social media, setting off outrage and months of nationwide protests calling for racial justice and an end to police brutality.  Mr. Chauvin is facing charges of manslaughter, second-degree murder and third-degree murder. Three other officers who were at the scene are scheduled to go on trial later this year.  But the current national reckoning on racism and police violence is not new. We watched Mr. Chauvin's trial with three families who have been affected by police violence to see this moment in history through their eyes.  For decades, video evidence has played a key role in exposing several high-profile cases, and has led to protests and calls for systemic change.  On March 3, 1991, a bystander filmed four Los Angeles police officers beating Mr. King, 25, after he surrendered following a high-speed pursuit. A jury did not convict any of the officers, and several days of riots broke out in the city. Ms. King shared that following the beating, her father couldn't walk, had 50 broken bones and had permanent brain damage.  ''My dad was never the same after that, you know, and everybody just considered him to be normal,'' said Ms. King. ''I think if that happened to anybody, they wouldn't be normal ever again.''  Nearly 20 years later, in Oakland, Calif., another incident was captured by bystanders on video, this time on a cellphone. On Jan. 1, 2009, Oscar Grant, 22, was shot and killed by a BART police officer, Johannes Mehserle, at Fruitvale Station. The white transit officer had been responding to a report of a fight when he shot Mr. Grant, who was unarmed, in the back. He later said he mistakenly fired his gun instead of his Taser.  When the witnesses who captured footage of Mr. Floyd's death appeared on TV, the Rev. Wanda Johnson, Mr. Grant's mother, saw parallels between Mr. Floyd's death and her son's. ''When my son was killed, there were several bystanders that filmed,'' she said. ''And had it not been for the cameras, we wouldn't even be here today. Because they would've probably said [his killing] was justified.''  About 70 miles away from Oakland, the family of Stephon Clark, who was also killed by the police, gathered in their Sacramento home to watch the trial of Mr. Chauvin. ''I invited particular members of my family because you can't address something in the community or the city or the nation until you address it at home'' said Sequette Clark, the mother of Stephon.  On March 18, 2018, Mr. Clark, 22, was killed in his grandparents' backyard in Sacramento. Mr. Clark, who was unarmed, was shot eight times by police officers Terrence Mercadal and Jared Robinet, who later said that they mistook Mr. Clark's cellphone for a gun as he moved toward them with his arms extended, ignoring their commands.  Ms. Clark said she was ''saddened'' while watching Mr. Chauvin's lawyer discuss Mr. Floyd's drug use, saying it reminded her of how the district attorney questioned her son's character. ''It reminded me of exactly what the district attorney did to Stephon,'' she said. The officers did not face criminal prosecution.  Mr. Chauvin's trial did offer Ms. Clark a sense of hope. ''It's a bittersweet thing what's happening,'' she said. ''I'm optimistic that this is a piece of justice for the death of my son.''  Lora Dene King watched the Chauvin trial at a friend's home in Long Beach, Calif. Her father, Rodney G. King, was brutally beaten by the police in Los Angeles in 1991. The police officers were acquitted, despite video evidence of the incident. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ELIE KHADRA FOR THE new_york_times; COURT TV VIA YOUTUBE; ELIE KHADRA FOR THE new_york_times); Rev. Wanda Johnson's son Oscar Grant was unarmed when he was fatally shot in the back by a BART police officer at Fruitvale Station in Oakland, Calif., in 2009. The officer, Johannes Mehserle, in the background above, had been responding to a report of a fight. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NEXSTAR/KTLA, LOS ANGELES VIA GETTY IMAGES; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; ELIE KHADRA FOR THE new_york_times); Stephon Clark was 22 when he was shot eight times by the police officers Terrence Mercadal and Jared Robinet, who later claimed they had mistaken his cellphone for a gun as he moved toward them. His mother, Sequette, did not see her son's case go to trial. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SACRAMENTO POLICE DEPARTMENT VIA YOUTUBE; THOMAS ABAD VIA GETTY IMAGES; ELIE KHADRA FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00035 "
454		"    Flipping the Script With Invisibility  By Elisabetta Povoledo  1,418 words 20 April 2021   1     The creators of ''Zero,'' including the co-writer Antonio Dikele Distefano, say they hope viewers enjoy it so much that the characters' racial identity becomes irrelevant.  ROME -- While much of the world spent 2020 in lockdowns of varying severity, the 28-year-old Italian author Antonio Dikele Distefano had the busiest year of his life.  Along with working on his sixth novel and interviewing Italians of different ethno-cultural backgrounds for a television program, he spent months on the set of ''Zero,'' a show inspired by one of his novels that premieres on Netflix on April 21.  This is Dikele Distefano's first time co-writing a television show. Until now, he has been best known for his books, gritty coming-of-age fiction, with classic themes of heartbreak, friendship and uncertainty about the future, which have become a publishing sensation in Italy. But the work of Dikele Distefano, whose parents migrated from Angola, also integrates his experiences of being a Black Italian.  And ''Zero,'' which refers to the nickname of the lead character, is the first Italian television series to feature a predominantly Black cast.  Dikele Distefano says he hopes that fact will only briefly be a talking point. He likes to cite ''Coming to America,'' the 1988 Eddie Murphy comedy that made more than $288 million at the box office worldwide, as an inspiration. ''The film is so entertaining that you don't even think about'' the fact that the cast is all Black, he said of that movie in a Zoom interview this week. ''For me, that is a victory.''  In his novels, Dikele Distefano takes a similar tack, throwing light on the lives of young people, the children of immigrants, who are not considered citizens even when they are born in Italy, speak the language and share the same cultural references. They can apply for Italian citizenship only when they turn 18.  The desire to change society motivates much of his work, he said, including ''the idea of, in the future, having a country where my nieces and nephews can say, 'I feel Italian.''' So far, growing calls to change the law and grant citizenship to anyone born in Italy have not gotten far in Parliament.  Dikele Distefano's raw and emotionally open approach to his writing has struck a chord with readers of his novels. While his books are shaped by his background, they home in on universal emotional truths.  ''People often say that we need beautiful stories,'' he said. ''I've always been drawn to real stories. Truth appeals to me.''  He added, ''I wouldn't be able to tell a story far from me, something that I haven't lived or that doesn't belong to me.''  It was Dikele Distefano's ''authentic voice'' and ''clear language'' that caught the attention of Netflix, said Ilaria Castiglioni, the streaming service's manager for Italian original series. She said that he was the first to bring to Netflix Italy the experiences of second-generation immigrants in Italy and that ''we were drawn to how he narrated his experience so naturally.''  ''Zero'' is the sixth made-in-Italy series for Netflix, after the crime drama ''Suburra: Blood on Rome,'' now in its third season; the teenage drama ''Baby,'' also in its third season; the historical fantasy ''Luna Nera''; the supernatural drama ''Curon,'' and ''Summertime,'' whose protagonist is a woman of Italian and Nigerian descent.  Castiglioni said Netflix had seen a need to better represent Italy's changing society. ''A very important theme for us is representation, to create empathy, so that as many people as possible find themselves reflected in what they see onscreen,'' she said.  But ''Zero'' is not overtly about the struggles and discriminations faced by Black Italians, she added.  ''We tried to tell a story that was universal,'' while recognizing the greater difficulties that Black Italians have to deal with, she said. ''Our objective is to create entertainment,'' she added, ''and if that entertainment creates a debate, it's a plus, but we leave that aspect to our public.''  ''Zero'' explores the metaphorical invisibility felt by many young people facing an uncertain future. In the figure of the main character, Omar (Giuseppe Dave Seke) an often-ignored pizza delivery guy, the metaphor is made literal: He can actually will himself to become invisible. Attempting to save his neighborhood from greedy property investors, the mild-mannered Omar becomes a community superhero, joining a group of other young people who have their own useful skill sets.  Angelica Pesarini, a professor at NYU Florence who focuses on issues of race, gender, identity and citizenship in Italy, said, ''The fact that the main character is a dark-skinned Black man -- already I think it's revolutionary in the Italian landscape.''  Though racism is rife in their country, Italians are loath to admit it to themselves, Pesarini said.  ''Netflix is doing a series with an almost entirely Black cast and then on the national channels you have horrific instances of racism that wouldn't be imaginable in the United States,'' she noted.  Among recent examples, an Italian actress used a racist slur during an interview on the national broadcaster in March. A few days later, a satirical program on the private broadcaster Mediaset aired an old parody of a lawmaker that also used the slur. In another skit, which aired this month, the same program was again accused of racism after the hosts made fun of Chinese people. On Wednesday, one of the hosts posted a video to apologize for that episode.  Pesarini, the NYU Florence professor, said, ''I was thinking of all the Black Italian kids watching these programs,'' and ''hearing the N-word referred to them.''  ''It was so violent for me as an adult, I can't imagine the damage this does for someone growing up in this country as a nonwhite Italian,'' added Pesarini, who is of Italian and East African heritage.  Pesarini and other activists have started a campaign, #cambieRAI (a play on the national broadcaster's name that translates as ''you will change''). She said that they had sent a letter to RAI ''explaining why we were shocked and fed up and frustrated'' with how Black people were represented on television in Italy. So far, there has been no response, she added.  The coronavirus set the production of ''Zero'' back an entire year. When Italy went into national lockdown in March 2020, the cast and Dikele Distefano decided to remain ensconced in a hotel in Rome, giving them an unexpected opportunity to bond, a chemistry that is manifest in the actors' onscreen interactions.  ''We became best friends, we still speak every day,'' Dikele Distefano said. That said, the tension of working within the restraints imposed by the pandemic is something he hopes never to repeat. ''I would like to work in a more relaxed way,'' he said, laughing.  ''Zero'' has a carefully selected soundtrack. Dikele Distefano's first forays into writing came via his passion for music, he said, and in his teens, he rapped under the name ''Nashy.'' In 2016, he founded Esse Magazine, a digital publication about Italian music and urban culture. ''Rap was a school for me, the possibility to express what I was feeling in four-four time,'' he said. When he discovered books, he gave up rap, he added, but without the music, ''I wouldn't be writing.''  Dikele Distefano worked on the script for ''Zero'' alongside the writers Carolina Cavalli, Lisandro Monaco, Massimo Vavassori and Stefano Voltaggio. The eight initial episodes end in a cliffhanger that seems to beg for a second season.  But Castiglioni said that Netflix had made no decision about any continuation. ''For now, we're concentrated on this series,'' she said. ''Let's see how it goes and then look to the future.''  ''I've always been drawn to real stories,'' said the Italian writer Antonio Dikele Distefano, above. ''Zero,'' a new Netflix series, is inspired by one of Dikele Distefano's novels. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALESSANDRO GRASSANI FOR THE new_york_times) (C1); Top, Antonio Dikele Distefano, one of the writers of ''Zero,'' a new Netflix series. Below right, Virginia Diop and Giuseppe Dave Seke, who plays Omar, the lead character in the show. Below left, from left on the pedestal, Giuseppe Dave Seke, Daniela Scattolin and Dylan Magon shooting an episode of ''Zero.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALESSANDRO GRASSANI FOR THE new_york_times; FRANCESCO BERARDINELLI/NETFLIX) (C6)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00031 "
455		"    London Fights for Its Financial Fief  By Eshe Nelson  1,641 words 20 April 2021   1     Other European cities are eating away at Britain's edge in financial services. The government is trying to find ways to keep it.  LONDON -- Coming out of Brexit this year, Britain's government needed a new blueprint for the future of the nation's financial services as cities like Amsterdam and Paris vied to become Europe's next capital of investment and banking.  For some, the answer was Deliveroo, a London-based food delivery company with 100,000 riders on motor scooters and bicycles. Although it lost more than 226 million pounds (nearly $310 million) last year, Deliveroo offered the raw promise of many fast-growing tech start-ups -- and it became a symbol of Britain's new ambitions by deciding to go public and list its shares not in New York but on the London Stock Exchange.  Deliveroo is a ''true British tech success story,'' Rishi Sunak, Britain's top finance official, said last month.  It was a false start. Deliveroo has since been called ''the worst I.P.O. in London's history.'' On the first day of trading, March 31, the shares dropped 26 percent below the initial public offering price. (It has gotten worse.)  The flop has put a dent in the image of the City of London -- the geographical and metaphorical name for Britain's financial hub -- as it tries to recover from the country's departure from the European Union. Some impacts from Brexit were immediate: On the first working day of 2021, trading in European shares shifted from venues in London to major cities in the bloc. Then London's share of euro-denominated derivatives trading dropped sharply. There's anxiety over what could go next.  Financial services are a vital component of Britain's economy, making up 7 percent of gross domestic product -- £132 billion in 2019, or some $170 billion. Exporting financial and other professional services is something Britain excels at. Membership in the European Union allowed London to serve as a financial base for the rest of the continent, and the City's business ballooned. Four-tenths of financial services exports go to the European Union.  The government has begun hunting for ideas to bolster London's reputation as a global finance center, in a series of reviews and consultations on a variety of issues, including I.P.O.s and trading regulations.  For many, the changes can't come soon enough.  ''The United Kingdom is not going to sit still and watch its financial services move across'' to other European cities, said Alasdair Haynes, the founder of Aquis, a trading venue and stock exchange for equities in London. This will make the next three or four years exciting, he said.  But this optimism isn't universal. The prospects of a warm and close relationship between Britain and the European Union have considerably dimmed. The two sides recently finished negotiations on a memorandum of understanding to establish a forum to discuss financial regulation, but the forum is voluntary, and the document has yet to be signed.  The European Union has made no secret of its plans to build up its own capital markets, which could flourish if London is denied access. The ''mood music in the E.U.,'' said Andrew Pilgrim, who leads the U.K. government and financial services team at EY, is focused on having autonomy over its own financial services and not being reliant on Britain.  For Britain, the appeal of writing its own financial rules is growing. The trick is luring more business without lowering London's regulatory standards, which many consider a powerful draw. A recent survey of global senior financial executives by Duff & Phelps found that fewer see London as the world's leading financial center but that it topped the leader board for regulatory environment.  Here are some of the plans.  Taking companies public  ''I want to make the United Kingdom the best place in the world for high-growth, innovative companies,'' Mr. Sunak told Parliament on March 3, the same day a review commissioned by the government recommended changes designed to encourage tech companies to go public in London. It proposed ideas, common in New York, that would let founders keep more control of their company after they began selling shares.  For example: allowing companies with two classes of shares and different voting rights (like Facebook) to list in the ''premium'' section of the London Stock Exchange, which could pave the way for them to be included in benchmark indexes. Or: allowing a company to go public while selling a smaller proportion of its shares than the current rules require.  The timing of Deliveroo's I.P.O. wasn't a coincidence. It listed with dual-class shares that give its co-founder William Shu more than half of the voting rights for three years -- a structure set to ''closely align'' with the review's recommendations, the company said.  But the idea may be a nonstarter among some of London's institutional investors. Deliveroo flopped partly because they balked at the offer of shares with minimal voting rights.  But others are excited by the ideas in the review, which was conducted by Jonathan Hill, a former European commissioner for financial services. Among them are Mr. Haynes, whose company, Aquis, acquired a stock exchange last year to compete with the London Stock Exchange.  ''I'm hugely supportive of what Lord Hill has done,'' said Mr. Haynes, who wants his exchange to one day become ''the Nasdaq of Europe.'' It is trying to entice companies with benefits such as a ban on short-selling (a practice in which investors bet against the price of a stock) on some of the larger companies that list with it. The Nasdaq has a coveted reputation for listing tech giants, including Microsoft, Apple and Facebook.  London doesn't have ''that alternative for fast-growing companies,'' Mr. Haynes said.  Space for SPACs  Mr. Hill's review also urges London to become a more inviting home for special purpose acquisition companies, or blank-check companies, the latest craze in financial markets, having taken off with investors and celebrities alike. SPACs are public shell companies that list on an exchange and then hunt for private companies to buy.  London has been left behind in the SPAC fervor. Last year, 248 SPACs listed in New York, and just four in London, according to data by Dealogic. In March, Cazoo, a British used car retailer, announced that it was going public via a SPAC in New York.  Already there are signs that Amsterdam could steal the lead in this booming business for Europe. There have been two SPACs each in London and Amsterdam this year, but the value of the listings in Amsterdam are five times that of London.  Britain's financial regulatory agency said it would start consultations on SPACs soon and aim to have new rules in place by the summer.  A future in fintech  London already has a reputation for producing high-flying financial technology companies such as Revolut and Monzo, which both expanded into the United States, and Wise (formerly Transferwise), which was valued at $5 billion last year. All three are so-called challenger banks, which offer financial services through apps without the need for brick-and-mortar branches.  The government clearly wants to build on this momentum. In February, it published an independent review of the fintech industry, and it is already acting on some of its recommendations, including setting up a fast-track visa process for people interested in coming to Britain to work for fintech companies. The review also recommended a program that would give regulatory blessing to small companies experimenting with new fintech offerings and services.  Making finance green  As Britain gears up to host the United Nations Climate Change Conference in November, the government wants to transform London into a global center for investors who want their money to go into green and sustainable initiatives.  Already, Mr. Sunak has said the Treasury will require large companies and financial firms to disclose, by 2025, any risks to their businesses associated with climate change and is working on a taxonomy to define what really counts as ''green.'' Next, millions of pounds will be invested in new research centers to provide climate and environmental data to financial companies.  The government is also seeking to regain ground lost to Germany, France and other European countries on the issuing of green bonds to finance projects to tackle climate change.  The City's future  London's finance industry isn't in danger of imminent collapse, but because of Brexit a cornerstone of the British economy isn't looking as formidable as it once did. And as London tries to keep up with New York, it is looking over its shoulders at the financial technology coming out of Asia.  The government has continuously billed Brexit as an opportunity to do more business with countries outside the European Union. This will be essential as international companies begin to ask whether they want to base their European business in London or elsewhere.  When it comes to the future of Britain, it's ''almost a back-to-the-future approach of London as an international center as opposed to being an international and European center,'' said Miles Celic, the chief executive of the CityUK, which represents the industry. ''It's doubling down on that international business.''  Workers near the City of London, the name for Britain's financial hub. Since Brexit, the British financial community and the European Union have drifted further apart. (B1); Construction in London. The U.K. ''is not going to sit still and watch its financial services move across'' to the E.U., said Alasdair Haynes, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALEX INGRAM FOR THE new_york_times) (B5)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00030 "
456		"    It's One America News, But It Acts Like Trump TV  By Rachel Abrams  1,702 words 20 April 2021   1     A recent OAN segment said there were ''serious doubts about who's actually president,'' and another blamed ''anti-Trump extremists'' for the Capitol attack.  Months after the inauguration of President Biden, One America News Network, a right-wing cable news channel available in some 35 million households, has continued to broadcast segments questioning the validity of the 2020 presidential election.  ''There's still serious doubts about who's actually president,'' the OAN correspondent Pearson Sharp said in a March 28 report.  That segment was one in a spate of similar reports from a channel that has become a kind of Trump TV for the post-Trump age, an outlet whose reporting has aligned with the former president's grievances at a time when he is barred from major social media platforms.  Some of OAN's coverage has not had the full support of the staff. In interviews with 18 current and former OAN newsroom employees, 16 said the channel had broadcast reports that they considered misleading, inaccurate or untrue.  To go by much of OAN's reporting, it is almost as if a transfer of power had never taken place. The channel did not broadcast live coverage of Mr. Biden's swearing-in ceremony and Inaugural Address. Into April, news articles on the OAN website consistently referred to Donald J. Trump as ''President Trump'' and to President Biden as just ''Joe Biden'' or ''Biden.'' That practice is not followed by other news organizations, including the OAN competitor Newsmax, a conservative cable channel and news site.  OAN has also promoted the debunked theory that the rioters who stormed the Capitol on Jan. 6 were left-wing agitators. Toward the end of a March 4 news segment that described the attack as the work of ''antifa'' and ''anti-Trump extremists'' -- and referred to the president as ''Beijing Biden'' -- Mr. Sharp said, ''History will show it was the Democrats, and not the Republicans, who called for this violence.'' Investigations have found no evidence that people who identify with antifa, a loose collective of antifascist activists, were involved in the Capitol riot.  Charles Herring, the president of Herring Networks, the company that owns OAN, defended the reports casting doubt on the election. ''Based on our investigations, voter irregularities clearly took place in the November 2020 election,'' he said. ''The real question is to what extent.''  Herring Networks was founded by Mr. Herring's father, the tech entrepreneur Robert Herring, who at age 79 runs OAN with Charles and another son, Robert Jr. About 150 employees work for the channel at its headquarters in San Diego.  Nielsen does not report viewership statistics for OAN, which is not a Nielsen client. (Charles Herring cited Nielsen's ''heavy fees.'') In a survey last month, Pew Research reported that 7 percent of Americans, including 14 percent of Republicans, had gotten political news from OAN. By contrast, 43 percent of Americans and 62 percent of Republicans had gotten political news from Fox News, the survey found.  While OAN appeals to a relatively small audience, its coverage reflects views commonly held by Republicans. In a Reuters/Ipsos poll last month, about half of Republicans said they believed that the Jan. 6 attack, which left five dead, was largely a nonviolent protest or was the handiwork of left-wing activists. Six in 10 of Republicans surveyed said they also believed Mr. Trump's claim that the election was ''stolen.''  OAN, which started in 2013, gained attention when it broadcast Mr. Trump's campaign speeches in full before the 2016 election. In recent months, it has courted viewers who may have felt abandoned by Fox News, which on election night was the first news outlet to project Mr. Biden as the winner of Arizona, a key swing state. In a mid-November promotional ad, OAN accused Fox News of joining ''the mainstream media in censoring factual reporting.''  OAN's stories ''appeal to people who want to believe that the election was not legitimate,'' said Stephanie L. Edgerly, an associate professor at Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. ''These are two mutually reinforcing narratives of people who want to believe it and continue to get that fire stoked by OAN.''  Marty Golingan, who joined the channel as a producer in 2016, said OAN had changed in recent years. At the start of his employment, he said, it concentrated more on neutral coverage based on reports from The Associated Press or Reuters. He saw it as a scrappy upstart where he could produce cheeky feature stories, he said.  During the Trump presidency, it moved right, Mr. Golingan said. And when he was watching coverage of the pro-Trump mob breaking into the Capitol, he said, he worried that his work might have helped inspire the attack.  He added that he and others at OAN disagreed with much of the channel's coverage. ''The majority of people did not believe the voter fraud claims being run on the air,'' Mr. Golingan said in an interview, referring to his colleagues.  He recalled seeing a photo of someone in the Capitol mob holding a flag emblazoned with the OAN logo. ''I was like, OK, that's not good,'' Mr. Golingan said. ''That's what happens when people listen to us.'' (Mr. Golingan said he was fired on Monday, the day after this article was published online.)  Charles Herring defended OAN's coverage. ''A review process with multiple checks is in place to ensure that news reporting meets the company's journalist standards,'' he said. ''And, yes, we've had our fair share of mistakes, but we do our best to keep them to a minimum and learn from our missteps.''  Mr. Golingan added that, since Inauguration Day, OAN's news director, Lindsay Oakley, had reprimanded him for referring to Mr. Biden as ''President Biden'' in news copy. Ms. Oakley did not reply to requests for comment.  ''OAN's staff White House reporters use the term President Biden and then may use Mr. Biden,'' Charles Herring said. ''The term Biden or Biden administration may also be used.'' He declined to reply to a question on the channel's use of ''President Trump'' for Mr. Trump.  Allysia Britton, a news producer, said she was one of more than a dozen employees who had left OAN in the wake of the Capitol riot. She criticized some of what the channel had reported, saying it was not up to journalistic standards.  ''Many people have raised concerns,'' Ms. Britton said in an interview. ''And the thing is, when people speak up about anything, you will get in trouble.''  Charles Herring confirmed that about a dozen OAN workers had left in recent months, saying many of them were not high-level employees.  Assignments that the elder Mr. Herring takes a special interest in are known among OAN staff as ''H stories,'' several current and former employees said. The day after Trump supporters stormed the Capitol, Mr. Herring instructed OAN employees in an email, which The new_york_times reviewed, to ''report all the things Antifa did yesterday.''  Some ''H stories'' are reported by Kristian Rouz, an OAN correspondent who had written for Sputnik, a site backed by the Russian government. In a report in May on the pandemic, Mr. Rouz said Covid-19 might have started as a ''globalist conspiracy to establish sweeping population control,'' one that had ties to Bill and Hillary Clinton, the billionaires George Soros and Bill Gates, and ''the deep state.''  Ms. Britton, the former OAN producer, recalled checking a website that Mr. Rouz had cited to back some of his reporting. ''It literally took me to this chat room where it's just conservatives commenting toward each other,'' she said.  In an email to staff last month, Ms. Oakley, the news director, warned producers against ignoring or playing down Mr. Rouz's work. ''His stories should be considered 'H stories' and treated as such,'' she wrote in the email, which The Times reviewed. ''These stories are often slugged and copy-edited by ME as per Mr. H's instructions.''  OAN's online audience is significant, with nearly 1.5 million subscribers to its YouTube channel. One of its most popular videos, with about 1.5 million views since it went online Nov. 24, criticized Dominion Voting Systems, the election technology company whose equipment was used in more than two dozen states last year, including several won by Mr. Trump. Hosted by the OAN White House correspondent, Chanel Rion, the video shows a man who said he had infiltrated Dominion and heard company executives say they would ''make sure'' Mr. Trump lost.  Dominion has sued Fox News and two of Mr. Trump's lawyers, Rudolph W. Giuliani and Sidney Powell, accusing them of making or promoting defamatory claims. A lawyer for Dominion, who did not reply to requests for comment, has said the company is considering further legal action.  Mr. Golingan, the producer, said some OAN employees had hoped Dominion would sue the channel. ''A lot of people said, 'This is insane, and maybe if they sue us, we'll stop putting stories like this out,''' he said.  Weeks after Dominion filed its first defamation suits, OAN broadcast a two-hour video in which the chief executive of MyPillow, Mike Lindell, made his case that widespread voter fraud had occurred. YouTube removed the video the day it was posted, saying it violated the platform's election integrity policy. Last month, an OAN report described Dominion's ''voting machines'' as ''notorious.''  Two of the current and former employees interviewed for this article -- Dan Ball, a talk-show host, and Neil W. McCabe, a former reporter -- described OAN's coverage as unbiased. Mr. McCabe, who now writes for The Tennessee Star, said the network gave a ''voice to people that are just not covered.''  Susan Beachy contributed research.  More than a dozen employees left One America News after the Capitol riot. Several say the network aired false reports.; Robert Herring, left, runs OAN with his sons, Charles, right, and Robert Jr. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NICK WASS/INVISION FOR BFI-GOOD NEWS SOURCE ONE AMERICA) (B4)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00033 "
457		"    A New York Intellectual Bastion Makes a Move to Midtown  By Jennifer Schuessler  685 words 20 April 2021   2     The New York Institute for the Humanities, founded in 1977 as a venue for cross-disciplinary conversation, is moving to the New York Public Library.  For a certain kind of intellectually inclined New Yorker, the weekly Friday lunch of the New York Institute for the Humanities has long been a coveted invitation. Held for more than four decades in a succession of sometimes cramped rooms at New York University, it's the kind of gathering where you suddenly realize that the seriously dressed-down person who had just abruptly put down a paper plate of deli sandwiches to pose a sharp question about a talk on Nietzsche's concept of anti-education or the legacy of the documentary ''Paris Is Burning'' is actually an eminent philosopher, a prizewinning novelist, or maybe a downtown musician or painter.  Now, after a period of pandemic-related uncertainty, the institute is leaving its longtime home at the university and moving uptown. Starting June 1, it will be based at the New York Public Library, which, after the pandemic lifts, will host the institute's weekly gatherings in its flagship 42nd Street building while partnering on public events through its Center for Research in the Humanities.  Eric Banks, the institute's director since 2013, said the move came after N.Y.U. informed him last fall that, as part of pandemic-related cuts, it would be discontinuing its support for the institution, which had a $200,000 annual budget. Under the new arrangement, the bulk of the institute's budget will be paid for by its own fund-raising, including what Banks said was ''substantial initial support'' from some of the group's fellows.  William Kelly, the library's director of research libraries, said in a statement that the partnership was important as the city faces what is likely to be ''a long and difficult recovery'' from the pandemic.  ''The city needs its cultural, educational and scholarly organizations to be strong and accessible, and this partnership certainly does that,'' he said.  The institute was founded in 1977 by the sociologist Richard Sennett (who is still an active member), with the goal of bringing publicly engaged scholars together with poets, novelists, critics and journalists for a kind of cross-disciplinary conversation that was relatively rare at the time. Early members included figures like Susan Sontag and Joseph Brodsky, while its public lecture series often featured leading international thinkers like Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault and Jorge Luis Borges (whose talk was piped into an auditorium that held a large overflow crowd).  Today, the institute's roughly 250 members, who are elected for life, include (to cite names from only the first page of its online directory) the broadcaster Jad Abumrad, the philosopher Paul Boghossian, the musician Laurie Anderson and the writer Ta-Nehisi Coates. In total, according to the library, the current ranks include 15 Pulitzer Prize winners and 16 MacArthur fellows.  While its weekly lunches are limited to fellows and guests, the institute also organizes free public events, which have included a two-day symposium in 2016 on Black Lives Matter; a 2018 celebration of the jazz experimentalist Cecil Taylor; and an eclectic exploration of solitary confinement in 2012 that brought criminal justice reformers together with artists and philosophers.  As the city's intellectual scene has evolved, the institute may no longer draw the kind of gossipy coverage that followed some of its internal blowups over the years. But Banks said the partnership with the library would help shore up and even expand its place in New York's ''intellectual infrastructure.''  ''It's not just a star-studded group,'' he said. ''The point is really to foster connections and conversations that are really hard to make happen under other circumstances.''  There will be an increase in brainy gatherings at the main branch of the public library, above, now that the New York Institute for the Humanities will be based at the Fifth Avenue building. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZACK DEZON FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0002y "
458		"    Denis Donoghue, 92, Literary Critic Who Marveled at Creativity, Dies  By Clay Risen  1,248 words 20 April 2021   23     He wrote prodigiously while teaching, first in Dublin and then in New York, and often clashed with critics he considered too political.  Denis Donoghue, an Irish academic whose wide-ranging literary tastes, erudite analysis of poets like T.S. Eliot and William Butler Yeats, and fierce aversion to the impositions of postmodern theory earned him a reputation as one of the last great humanist critics, died on April 6 at his home in Durham, N.C. He was 92.  His death was confirmed by his daughter Emma Donoghue, the novelist.  First at University College Dublin and later at New York University, Professor Donoghue carved out a middle ground in the contested landscape of late-20th-century literary studies, standing opposed to both the politicized theories of the left and the traditionalist pieties of the right.  He was an ardent opponent of deconstruction, and in the late 1970s and early '80s he wrote lengthy takedowns of its leading proponents, including Jacques Derrida and Paul de Man. But his criticism later softened. At least the deconstructionists paid close attention to texts, as he did, unlike the real objects of his derision: what he called ''ideologically opportunistic'' theories that, taking a page from Marxism, saw literature as little more than a social construct to be analyzed alongside things like comic books and soap operas, and that criticized as hopelessly bourgeois the sort of close reading he performed.  ''If I am listening to a quartet by Bartok or reading 'Nostromo,''' he wrote in his book ''The Practice of Reading'' (1998), ''I should not be using the occasion to plan my next move in the class struggle or the war of all against all.''  Although he was never associated with an intellectual movement or theory, there were certain through-lines in Professor Donoghue's work -- above all his fascination with the irrational, almost mystical quality at the heart of the creative process.  He expounded his views prodigiously. As an author, co-author or editor of more than 30 books, he also contributed lengthy essays to learned publications like Salmagundi and The Sewanee Review and punchy, shorter pieces to The New York Review of Books and The New Republic. At his death he had just finished writing a book on the later novels of Henry James.  In the late 1980s he shared a weekly rotating column in The new_york_times Book Review with Anatole Broyard, Cynthia Ozick and Marilynne Robinson, a position that allowed him to write expansively not just about books but about whatever caught his mind.  ''He thought it was a great thing to be able to write about Jonathan Swift one minute and Lady Gaga the next,'' his daughter said.  Professor Donoghue was a lifelong devotee of postwar American literary critics, in particular poet-critics like Allen Tate, John Crowe Ransom and Kenneth Burke. A favorite memory from his undergraduate years was receiving a handwritten letter from Mr. Ransom, the editor of the Kenyon Review, accepting one of his essays.  He was equally proud of his skills in the classroom. He could speak for an hour without pause or notes, dominating the lectern with his 6-foot-7 frame.  In a 2003 speech, the writer Colm Toibin, who studied with Professor Donoghue in the early 1970s, described his ''heightened tone, the lack of hesitation, the thinking aloud as fierce and eloquent activity, and the sense also that this mattered more than anything else mattered -- this attempt to analyze and define and almost imitate layers and levels of feeling, of imaginative energy, of tonal nuance.''  Denis Martin Donoghue was born on Dec. 1, 1928, in Tullow, a village in southern Ireland, and grew up in Warrenpoint, a seaside town just over the border into Northern Ireland.  His father, also named Denis, had been a sergeant in the Royal Irish Constabulary, a police force. After Ireland won independence in 1922, he was allowed to stay on with the Royal Ulster Constabulary in the north, though he had little hope for advancement as a Roman Catholic in the British-run and Protestant-dominated unit.  Young Denis's mother, Johanna (O'Neill) Donoghue, was a homemaker who took care of him and his four siblings. They lived in the married quarters of the constabulary barracks, beside a tall concrete wall built to protect them from attack by Irish nationalists.  Denis took to reading early, and though his parents were not bookish, they encouraged his interests. In his memoir, ''Warrenpoint'' (1990), he wrote that his love for his stern but kind father set the tone for his love of the written word as something to be revered. ''I am sure,'' he wrote, ''that the authority of a written sentence and the authority of my father were one and the same.''  He studied Latin and English at University College Dublin. He also studied lieder singing at the Royal Irish Academy of Music.  Professor Donoghue married Frances Rutledge, a former teacher and flight attendant, in 1951. She died in 2018. In addition to his daughter Emma, he is survived by his second wife, the novelist Melissa Malouf; four other daughters, Barbara Nelson and Celia, Helen and Stella Donoghue; three sons, David, Hugh and Mark; 11 grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.  After graduation he took a position in the Irish civil service, which made him miserable. Three years into the job, he encountered one of his old professors on a Dublin sidewalk and told him how unhappy he was. His mentor offered to make him a lecturer at the university.  He went on to receive a master's and a doctorate in literature at the university and another master's degree from Cambridge, where he lectured from 1965 to 1966. He returned to Dublin a full professor, and remained there until 1980, when he moved to New York University.  His position at N.Y.U. required just one semester of teaching a year, allowing him to spend the rest of his time back in Dublin with his wife and children -- and, of course, his energetic writing schedule.  He and his wife ran their family like a writers' retreat, the house full of books and both of them on hand to discuss them.  ''Words were treated as holy things in our family,'' Emma Donoghue said. ''My parents let me read and write, and read and write. It wasn't the sort of oppressive childhood that every writer seems to need, but I found it a source of endless energy.''  He was overjoyed when his daughter became the author of critically acclaimed novels like ''Room'' and ''Akin'' -- perhaps, in part, because he was almost completely incapable of writing fiction or poetry himself.  ''I have never been able to tell a story or even to recall one,'' he wrote in ''Warrenpoint.'' And despite his lifelong devotion to the study of the creative process, that was OK with him.  ''It did not grieve me that I lacked inventiveness, could not make up a story or imagine a sequence of thoughts requiring rhyme,'' he wrote. ''Mine was the intelligence that came after.''  In his 1990 memoir, Professor Donoghue linked ''the authority of a written sentence and the authority of my father.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS); Denis Donoghue taught at University College Dublin and New York University and published more than 30 books. He wrote expansively about poetry, books and the imagination of writers. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA DONOGHUE FAMILY)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k00032 "
459		"    As Glacial Pace Goes, This Qualifies as a Sprint  By Jugal K. Patel and Henry Fountain  1,052 words 20 April 2021   8     The Muldrow Glacier, on the north side of Denali, is undergoing a rare surge.  The Muldrow Glacier, on the north side of Denali in Alaska, is undergoing a rare surge. In the past few months the 39-mile-long river of ice has been moving as much as 90 feet a day, 100 times its usual speed.  The event has excited glaciologists, who've rushed to study it using satellite imaging, specialized aerial photography and global positioning system devices delicately placed on the shifting ice.  Surges often last only a few months. Most of them occur on remote glaciers and are detected only after they've ended -- when, for example, satellite images show that a glacier front has rapidly advanced. But the Muldrow is within Denali National Park and Preserve. Planes regularly fly over the glacier carrying sightseers and climbers eager to ascend North America's highest mountain.  In early March, the pilot of just such a flight near the Muldrow Glacier noticed large numbers of new crevasses as well as changes to lateral moraines, areas of rocky debris that build up on the edges of glaciers. ''They looked all torn up,'' said Chris Palm, the pilot, with K2 Aviation.  He took photographs with his phone, which were quickly shared with researchers, including some from the National Park Service who have been studying the glacier for years. Satellite data soon confirmed that the ice was moving much faster than the speed it had averaged over recent decades, less than a foot a day.  The stress and strain from rapid movement of so much ice -- the glacier is up to about 1,500 feet thick and a mile and a half across -- is causing all the deformation and fracturing.  ''The whole glacier is so cracked up,'' said Chad Hults, the Alaska regional geologist with the park service, who landed on the Muldrow in late March in a helicopter to set up equipment to measure the speed and other characteristics of the surge.  Mr. Hults was involved in a study of the Muldrow two decades ago, when the glacier was quiet and calm and relatively easy to walk across. This time, he said, the ice was so shattered it was hard to find a place to land the helicopter. And he could hear loud crashes and booms from breaking and falling ice even over the noise of the aircraft's engine.  The Muldrow was the route used by the first climbers to ascend Denali, in 1913, and still some climbers choose that way up the mountain. But with the climbing season about to begin, the route may be impassable, Mr. Hults said.  Surges occur on only about 1 percent of glaciers worldwide. And on a given glacier, decades may pass between events. Because of that relative rarity, scientists haven't been able to study them enough to have a complete understanding of why they happen, or to gauge how climate change, which is rapidly melting glaciers in Alaska and elsewhere, may be affecting them.  Mark Fahnestock, a glaciologist at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, said changes in the mass balance between the top and bottom of the glacier play a critical role in surges. Over time, ice accumulates in the higher, colder stretches and is lost from the lower, warmer ones.  ''The upper parts thicken and the lower parts melt back,'' Dr. Fahnestock said. The surge restores the balance, rapidly shifting mass down to the lower parts.  Since global warming is causing less ice accumulation and more melting, Dr. Fahnestock said it is likely to have an impact. ''There will be effects, especially in Alaska because the mass loss is so high,'' he said.  The Muldrow last surged in 1956-57, and research from the region suggested that it has done so about every 50 years. So scientists were expecting the glacier to surge again at some point.  But what actually triggers a surge is not fully understood.  For the Muldrow and many other surging glaciers, meltwater that becomes trapped at the base of the glacier by sediment or other rocky debris, called till, may be part of what sets a surge off, said Martin Truffer, a glaciologist at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.  This meltwater, created from the heat of friction between the ice and bedrock and from heat within the Earth itself, builds up in the trapped area. At some point the water pressure becomes so high that the friction between the ice and bedrock is reduced, and the glacier picks up speed.  The Muldrow lies along a major fault, the Denali, and the steep, rugged terrain has been broken up by earthquakes and suffers severe erosion. So the glacier, like many other glaciers that surge, has a lot of debris underneath it that could trap water.  ''You need lots of till,'' Dr. Truffer said. ''But that alone is not enough.''  Surges usually begin in the winter and end in the summer, when water from surface melting greatly increases the flow through the glacier, to the point where any bottlenecks are broken up. That lowers the water pressure and increases the friction, slowing the ice.  Some surges start again the following winter when meltwater flow decreases. But Dr. Truffer and others think the Muldrow is moving so fast that the shift in mass balance will play itself out in the next few months, and it will stop until the next surge, decades from now.  The 1956-57 surge pushed ice about four miles beyond the existing terminus. That ice has been stagnant since then, much of it now covered with tundra, said Guy Adema, a park service scientist who led the Muldrow study two decades ago. It is visible from one of the park's visitor centers.  Mr. Adema said the current surge may push over and beyond the old ice, and if so should provide a visual treat for viewers -- a wall of gleaming, fresh ice, cracking and occasionally breaking off pieces.  Above, crevasses formed on the Muldrow Glacier, on the north side of Denali, from the pressure of surging ice. Left, an audio recorder was set up to capture the sounds of rapidly moving ice. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0002t "
460		"    Which Future Will We Choose?  By Julia Rosen  1,044 words 20 April 2021   4     Take a look around your home. Your lights, refrigerator and television are all powered by electricity. For most of human history, we lived without it. But since the late 1800s, electricity has become an essential part of modern life. Americans now use 13 times as much as they did in the 1950s.  Your home probably gets electricity from power lines that run along your street. They lead to a power station, one small part of a vast energy network that keeps our houses, businesses and factories running.  Historically, we've produced electricity by burning fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas. These substances also provide most of the energy used for heat and nearly everything else humans do. Today, fossil fuels are big business. People use almost seven billion tons of coal every year and roughly 100 million barrels of oil and other liquid fuels every single day.  Fossil fuels form deep underground from the remains of ancient plants and animals. When we extract them and use them for energy, we release prehistoric carbon into the air as carbon dioxide and methane.  These greenhouse gases work like a blanket. As the sun's energy warms the planet, they prevent some of Earth's heat from escaping. Human-caused emissions have already made the climate hotter than it's been in at least a thousand years. And we keep producing more.  When we burn fossil fuels, we also produce pollutants that can cause health problems. These pollutants hurt low-income people and communities of color the most. Those people often live near pollution sources like power plants or major highways because of housing prices and discrimination.  In the United States, cars and trucks are a major source of both harmful pollutants and greenhouse gases. Over all, transportation produces more than a third of the country's carbon dioxide emissions.  Greenhouse gases also come from less obvious sources. Think about the concrete buildings and sidewalks in your town. The cement that holds them together is made by crushing and heating limestone, which requires energy and releases carbon dioxide. Cement, steel and other industries account for about 20 percent of global emissions.  What we eat matters, too. Cows and other livestock produce greenhouse gases when they burp, fart and poop. Gases also seep from crop fields.  In some places, like the Amazon Rainforest, people cut down trees to clear lands for farming. And this releases large amounts of carbon stored in wood and soils. Globally, agriculture and other ways of using the land account for about a quarter of all greenhouse gas emissions.  Right now, we're at a fork in the road. If we continue on like this, we'll head to the Bad Future, where  life will get harder for many people and other living things. Or we could make big changes and turn  a corner -- toward the Better Future.  In the Bad Future, most places on Earth will be hotter, although there will still be some cold days. School and sports will be canceled during intense heat waves. High temperatures could even be fatal for vulnerable populations like older people and those who work outside.  Changes in the weather will make it harder for us to grow food. In certain places, water supplies will dry up. Many people will leave their homes in search of better places to live, and the poor will suffer more than the rich. This is already happening.  Extreme heat and drought will make wildfires even more dangerous. More of us will be exposed to unhealthy smoke. Many plants and animals will face extinction from habitat loss and other human threats.  As glaciers and ice sheets continue to melt, rising seas will drive people out of many coastal communities. The ocean will get more acidic as seawater absorbs carbon dioxide from the air. Coral reefs will most likely disappear.  That all sounds really bad. But it doesn't  have to be this way! There is still time to choose the other path -- toward the Better Future.  In the Better Future, the greenhouse gases we've already released would bring warmer temperatures, higher sea levels and ecological changes. But we would cut emissions, so the effects of climate change would be slower and less extreme, so nature and society could adapt more easily. Wealthier countries, which have done the most to cause climate change, would help poorer countries cope with the effects.  This future would still bring large wildfires and poor harvests, but less often. We could protect forests and plant more trees, which suck some carbon back out of the air as they grow. Indigenous peoples with deep ecological knowledge could lead the way.  We could also eat differently in the Better Future. Many people could eat less meat than they do today. And our farms could grow crops that are well suited to the new climate and use sustainable farming practices.  The transformation would touch every part of society, including industry. We could invent ways of making concrete that emit much less carbon dioxide. We would live and work in energy-efficient buildings made of sustainable materials like wood and local stone.  In the Better Future, we would get around in cars that run on electricity and cleaner-burning fuels, instead of gasoline and diesel. This would also improve air quality in many communities. Cities could encourage people to travel on public transit and bikes. Planes would still emit some carbon dioxide, but we could fly less.  Sunlight, wind and other renewable energy sources would provide electricity without producing more greenhouse gases. We could store extra energy to use later, so that the lights stay on even when it's cloudy or when there's no breeze.  And here's the good news: We already know how  to make many of these changes, and they're already happening in many places -- just not fast enough.  The biggest challenges we face are not about science, they are about people. World leaders and business people have to get serious about addressing climate change, and the rest of us have to help.  Will we do it? The choice is ours. Because the  science is settled, but the future is not.  Document NYTF000020210420eh4k0002u "
461		"    Red Flag Law Didn't Prevent Indianapolis Shooter  By Campbell Robertson, Ali Watkins and Andrés R. Martínez  1,406 words 19 April 2021   17     Red flag laws are supposed to keep guns away from people who should not have them. That did not happen with the gunman who killed eight people in Indianapolis.  INDIANAPOLIS -- They are the rare gun laws that attract bipartisan agreement -- so-called red flag laws, which allow the authorities to temporarily take away guns from people declared by a judge to be too unstable to have them.  The case of Brandon Hole appeared, at first, to be exactly the kind of situation these laws were designed to address. Indeed, last March, when Mr. Hole's mother raised alarms about his mental state, the police seized a shotgun from his home. It was never returned.  But a year later, the police say, Mr. Hole, 19, shot and killed eight people at a FedEx facility before killing himself, using rifles he had legally purchased not long after that incident in March 2020.  While many details are still unclear, Mr. Hole's case is a sobering example of how even states with widely supported safeguards can fail to prevent dangerous people from obtaining firearms. The laws, experts say, are often used only as short-term solutions. In the days after the shooting, local officials have struggled to explain how a man who was deemed by law enforcement as too unstable to possess a weapon could go on to legally buy one months later.  ''Any law is only as good as the people that are enforcing it,'' said Brad Banks, a former prosecutor in Marion County, which includes Indianapolis, who is now in private practice. ''Does it make sense we took away the gun because he's too dangerous to have one, but we didn't take the step to prevent him from going out and buying one the next day?  Red flag laws are in place in more than a dozen states, including Florida and New York. Their conditions vary widely; in California, for example, family members can directly petition to have firearms temporarily seized from their loved ones. But in Indiana, only law enforcement can initiate that process in court.  Named for Timothy Laird, a police officer who was shot in the line of duty in 2004, the Indiana law is one of the oldest of its kind in the country. It passed in the Republican-held state legislature by an almost unanimous vote in 2005.  The law has been particularly effective in reducing suicides. A study from the University of Indianapolis showed a 7.5 percent decrease in firearm-related suicides in the decade after the law's passage. In Indianapolis alone, more than 400 people were subject to it from 2006 to 2013, the study said.  Under the statute, a person is considered dangerous if he ''presents an imminent risk'' to himself or others, or if he fits certain other criteria, including a documented propensity for violence.  In March 2020, Mr. Hole's mother approached officers at a Police Department roll call and told them she believed that her son was having suicidal thoughts and might even try to commit ''suicide by cop,'' the chief of the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police, Randal Taylor, said on Sunday.  Jimmy Clark, 79, a retired auto service worker who lives across the street, remembered the situation. ''He wanted the cops to kill him,'' said Mr. Clark, adding that Mr. Hole was an angry young man who always seemed to be ''mad at the world.''  When the police arrived at the house, Mr. Hole's mother ''asked him to come down,'' the chief said. ''When he does, they'd already felt they had enough information to do the needed detention.''  Mr. Hole, who was 18 at the time, was taken to a hospital on a ''mental health temporary hold,'' according to Paul Keenan, the special agent in charge of the F.B.I.'s Indianapolis office.  Having been told about a shotgun that Mr. Hole had recently purchased, an officer at the house went upstairs to take it, the chief said, and saw on the young man's computer ''some stuff about some white supremacy ideations and those kind of things.'' Federal investigators would interview Mr. Hole about those discoveries the next month, though they would conclude that he did not harbor an ideology of ''racially motivated violent extremism.''  The main concern at the time of the police visit, the chief said, was Mr. Hole's comments ''about killing himself or possibly even allowing us to kill him.'' And so the officers took the shotgun. It was never returned.  The seizure of weapons under red flag laws is often temporary. In Indiana, once a weapon is taken by the police, prosecutors have 14 days to justify the seizure to a judge. If such a determination is not made, the firearms are immediately returned. But if the judge decides the person in question is so unstable that he or she should not be permitted to have guns, the police hold onto the seized weapons, and the person is barred from possessing any guns for at least six months.  The permanent seizure of Mr. Hole's shotgun would therefore suggest that prosecutors had sought and obtained a red flag determination. But this apparently did not happen. ''For whatever reason,'' Chief Taylor said, ''that never made it to the court.''  Chief Taylor said it was not the police's role to make the decision of whether to bring the case to court for a red flag hearing. The prosecutors' office ''would get a notification,'' he said, that police had taken a weapon and that the owner of it had been expressing suicidal thoughts. It would be then up to that office to act, he said. ''In reality, he may have qualified, but that is for the prosecutors'' to determine, Chief Taylor said.  Ryan Mears, the Marion County prosecutor, said in an interview at a vigil on Saturday that he did not know what had happened in this case. But he suggested, posing a hypothetical, that the authorities might have taken the gun in response to pleas from concerned family members, and considered the crisis resolved.  ''What could have occurred,'' Mr. Mears said, ''is the point was: 'Let's get the gun out of there, make sure the gun is not returned,' if that was the agreement that was made. And I'm not saying that it is the case. But there's no reason to go in front of the judge at that point in time, because the point is we want to take the weapon away.''  Experts note that most red flag laws are primarily built to address short-term, imminent crises, said Aaron J. Kivisto, a psychology professor at the University of Indianapolis who was an author of the study on the state's statute.  ''Most suicides are fairly impulsive acts, he said. ''And if the person can get through the short term crisis, the suicide doesn't occur, or the homicide doesn't occur.''  Still, this would not explain how the authorities legally held on to the shotgun after the 14 days. But the chief said Mr. Hole called at one point and said that ''he didn't want the weapons back.''  ''It's not uncommon,'' the chief said. ''People realize, you know, 'Maybe I shouldn't have it.' They just say, 'Let it go.' But I don't know what his motivation was.''  In any case, without a red flag restriction, Mr. Hole would go on to buy two powerful firearms within the next six or seven months.  For those who have studied the evolution of red flag laws, Mr. Hole may turn out to be a tragic example of their shortcomings. In practice, experts say containing more chronic threats like Mr. Hole might be beyond the laws' reaches, in their current forms.  ''Maybe it prevented something for a year, or six months,'' Mr. Kivisto said. ''And then it wasn't enough.''  Robert Chiarito, Alison Saldanha and Brandon Dupré contributed reporting from Indianapolis.  Mourners at a vigil for the Indianapolis shooting victims. Most red flag laws are built to address short-term, imminent crises. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J MAST FOR THE new_york_times); Chief Randal Taylor of the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police said they seized a shotgun from Brandon Hole's home a year ago. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JON CHERRY/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210420eh4j0000m "
462		"    A Grisham Book Tackles A Different Kind of Court  By Sopan Deb  1,462 words 19 April 2021   3     Grisham has spent the past 30 years churning out legal thrillers, but the pandemic's impact on college sports prompted him to shift his focus to a basketball novel called ''Sooley.''  There is a basketball term to describe the author John Grisham: volume shooter.  Since releasing his first hit novel, ''The Firm,'' in 1991, Grisham hasn't gone a year without publishing a book. This includes the dozens of easy-to-digest legal thrillers that have brought Grisham, a former lawyer, hundreds of millions of dollars in book sales, as well as film and television deals. There are seven children's books, a Christmas novel (''Skipping Christmas,'' which was turned into the 2004 film ''Christmas With the Kranks'') and three sports novels.  For his 46th book, ''Sooley,'' Grisham is bringing volume shooting to print, with his first basketball novel.  It tracks a 17-year-old named Sam­uel Sooleymon, who leaves Sudan for the first time to play college basketball in the United States. While he is stateside, a civil war in Sudan rages on, leaving members of his family stranded in a refugee camp. He vows to rescue his family, especially as hopes grow that he will be drafted by an N.B.A. team.  In an interview, Grisham, who played baseball and basketball at South Haven High School in Mississippi, said the idea for the story began three years ago, when he read an article about the South Sudanese national team competing in Hawaii at the World Youth Basketball Tournament. He combined their story with that of Mamadi Diakite, who is from Guinea and played four seasons at the University of Virginia. Diakite signed a two-way contract with the Milwaukee Bucks in November. (There is a familiar third source of inspiration, which would require a major spoiler.)  ''I've been wanting to write a book about college basketball for a long time,'' said Grisham, 66. ''I love sports. I love sports stories. I especially love college sports, and I especially love sad sports stories.''  Grisham, who was a Democratic state legislator in Mississippi from 1983 to 1990, has begun branching out in recent years from his signature Southern legal thrillers.  In a phone call, he discussed his research process, why the civil war in Sudan was a central story line and hating Duke University. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.  Did you start writing this in 2020?  I was sitting in a bar with a friend having a drink and they flashed on television, ''March Madness is canceled!'' And I thought that was the end of the world. I never thought they could cancel March Madness. And so I took it pretty hard. I thought, ''You know, we're all depressed about it.'' And I said: ''I'm going to think real hard. I've got some ideas about a novel for college basketball. So I'm going to start and then get it done this year.''  What is it about the Sudanese civil war that interested you enough to include it as a major story line in this book?  Just the sheer tragedy of that poor country. That they were fighting the civil war back in the early 1960s, when the south of Sudan hated the north. Religious differences. Ethnic differences. Language differences. And they just always were fighting each other. And the south was always the short end of the stick. And then in 2011, a deal brokered by the United States, primarily Susan Rice, did a great job. We intervened. Europe intervened.  We all sided with the rebels, and then in 2011, there was a sort of peace deal, and they were given the right to vote in the South, and 99 percent of the South Sudanese voted for independence. I remember it vividly. It was a great day. It was the newest nation on earth, and it was going to be democratic, and it was going to be all these wonderful things, and people are going to get along and prosper and blah, blah, blah. And it lasted barely two years and a horrible civil war broke out again. Anyway, it's just the tragedy of what those people have gone through and are still enduring.  You very vividly describe some of the horrors that the refugees endure. Did you talk to refugees? How were you able to describe that?  Well, first of all, I was able to pull together probably a dozen books. There's some great books written by people who know the country, refugees, people who escaped, people who are still there, children. There's just some phenomenal memoirs written by the South Sudanese. There's tons of stuff online. I mean, you can watch YouTube videos all night long of the refugee camps, and it doesn't take much to get the flavor of what's going on there. It's so awful and tragic, and the people are so resilient. But it's also heartbreaking to see how they live and how dire their circumstances still are. So, no, I didn't leave the computer. You know, honestly, the internet and Google have made book research so much easier because everything is there.  I'm a huge reader. I love to read about places like that, as sad as they were. So I didn't have to go chasing around to talk to refugees or refugee groups. I did chase down some basketball guys I know. I played the sport as a white kid in Mississippi in the late 1960s; that was one brand of basketball. It's nothing like today. I don't know the game inside now, like players and coaches do today.  Tony Bennett [coach of the Virginia men's team] is one of my heroes in life, and he knows so much about basketball. I love watching the games. I have no idea what's really happening. He does. Coaches do. So I talked to coaches. I talked to a couple of former players, just about the ins and outs of college basketball.  I couldn't help but notice in the story that Sooley's team at one point upsets Duke. You come from a University of North Carolina family. Was that a purposeful decision? (Grisham's wife, daughter and son-in-law are U.N.C. alumni.)  Very purposeful.  I thought as much.  We're Tar Heels, OK? It's an intense rivalry. You know, each team has a lot of respect for the other, great coaches and all that, but you know, we're Tar Heel fans, and hey, they had to beat somebody, OK? It was so much fun.  Most of your books take place in environments you grew up in. What was your level of comfort in centering a story on a trauma that, as a wealthy white person, is not something you ever saw firsthand?  Well, I think I approach it differently. I hope to bring awareness to their problem, to their plight. I hope that people will, who maybe had not thought about it before, will show some interest in that, and then understand what these people are going through and maybe help in some way, maybe send a check.  I've had several of my books, most of them dealing with wrongful convictions, where at the end in my author's note, I would say: ''These organizations are doing God's work. If you've got a spare buck, send them a check.'' And the money pours in. So, I mean, I do have that level of influence with some people. So I'm always aware of trying to help people along the way. Yeah, I mean, I'm a wealthy white person, so I'm not going to apologize for that. I've got to write something, OK? [Laughter.]  What's next for you?  Halfway through the next legal thriller. I'll finish it in July, wrote a thousand words this morning. That's my routine.  Is there another sport you'd like to write about?  I have a golf book. I started playing golf at the age of 55, which was 11 years ago, which is insanity. It's just very difficult to learn the game, as hard as it is, when you take it up at the age of 55, and it's been a real struggle. It's also been quite humorous.  Are you an N.B.A. fan?  Not at all. I have not followed the N.B.A. in 50 years.  The new book by John Grisham deals with basketball and the civil war in Sudan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUBLEDAY PUBLISHING; RYAN PFLUGER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00044 "
463		"    No Recent Game Film? No Combine? Evaluating Talent Has a New Process.  By Emmanuel Morgan  1,355 words 19 April 2021   2     Players and scouts adjusted their methods to account for the absence of a traditional combine in Indianapolis.  Micah Parsons relaxed his 246-pound body as he decelerated from running the 40-yard dash in front of N.F.L. scouts at a predraft showcase hosted by his college, Penn State, in late March.  When Parsons, a linebacker projected to be one of the first defensive players selected in the 2021 N.F.L. draft, learned he clocked in at 4.39 seconds -- a time comparable to receivers and running backs -- he pounded his chest and pointed upward.  ''It's like a weight lifted off my shoulders,'' he said afterward. ''Now I can finally relax.''  Parsons, 21, is one of over 100 Division I players who opted out of the 2020 college football season because of coronavirus concerns, leaving N.F.L. talent evaluators precious little current information to go on in a year further hindered by the absence of a traditional scouting combine. Parsons knew that his data offered his strongest argument for why a franchise should still draft him a year after his last in-game action.  Prospects and N.F.L. teams are adapting to having to rely on university-hosted workouts, teleconference interviews and video analysis, data that isn't standardized and, in most cases, wasn't collected in person, to make their draft cases.  College-hosted workouts, or pro days, took on added importance after the N.F.L. canceled the in-person workout portion of its draft scouting combine, typically hosted in Indianapolis every spring. That decision meant players would conduct their 40-yard dashes, bench presses and vertical jumps -- among other physical tests that can sway draft slotting drastically -- at their college facilities, rather than at a neutral site with standardized measures.  Many players who had opted out spent the college football season and beyond prepping specifically for that testing, as many draft eligible players do each spring. Without a college season, they had longer than usual to train. Parsons signed with an agency, Athletes First, and moved to Santa Ana, Calif., in September to train full time and focus on how he would perform in front of scouts in March.  Along with some other star players who opted out, such as Louisiana State receiver Ja'Marr Chase and Oregon offensive lineman Penei Sewell, Parsons is among the potential first-round picks who are trying to remind N.F.L. teams of the promise and acumen they haven't been able to display publicly in over a year.  Chase, who in 2019 set Southeastern Conference records with 1,780 receiving yards and 20 touchdowns on the way to a national championship and undefeated season, enrolled with Exos, a company that trains professional athletes, in October and temporarily relocated to Texas. There, his packed days mimicked his collegiate peers'. Starting at 8 a.m., he rotated through positional workouts, speed drills, weight training and physical therapy until around 3:30 p.m., six days a week.  ''We wanted him to be in a predictable situation,'' said Brent Callaway, the company's director of sport performance. ''We wanted to put him in the best situation possible to be able to maximize his strength and change direction with speed whenever the stopwatches came out.''  Still, being at his best for L.S.U.'s pro day on March 31 meant timing his gains to the testing. Chase entered Exos at 207 pounds and swelled to 213 pounds, so Callaway pulled him off upper-body lifts ahead of the pro day. Chase weighed 201 pounds by his workout, where he ran a 4.38-second 40-yard dash, faster, by nearly three-tenths of a second, than when he first got to Exos in October. Chase's 41-inch vertical jump was an increase of seven inches.  ''I would say I kind of surprised myself,'' Chase told reporters.  As important as pro days have been to this year's scouting process, those involved acknowledged that the circumstances were less than ideal. Prospects at one school may work out or test on grass while others run on FieldTurf or another surface, creating an unequal comparison.  ''I think also we're trying to compensate for what we see on tape and matching what we see in the player,'' said Howie Roseman, the Philadelphia Eagles' general manager.  With pro days scattered across the country and Covid-19 protocols still in effect for team staffs, scouting departments had to choose which workouts, if any, to attend in person. The Los Angeles Rams, who hold six total picks in this year's draft, none in the first round, sent scouts to about a dozen pro day workouts, J.W. Jordan, the team's director of draft management, said. Because of coronavirus concerns, the team instructed scouts to travel only by car and prohibited overnight stays, which limited them to regional workouts.  ''From a scouting perspective, it's getting less and less necessary for you to go in person,'' Jordan said. ''Everything you're trying to accomplish they already give it to you.''  [Video: Watch on YouTube.]  Rams staff relied mostly on videos and data of pro days provided to them by the league. To verify prospects' times that seemed a tad fast, Jordan said their scouts would watch the drill onscreen and clock it themselves.  This year's limits on draft evaluations have also meant changes to the more subjective parts of the scouting process. Players recovering from injuries, like Syracuse's Andre Cisco, whose knee injury early last season prompted him to opt out, got a chance to reassure N.F.L. teams of their health with in-person examinations in Indianapolis conducted by team doctors in April. While the top 100 athletes, plus 44 others who had an eligible medical history, received an additional physical checkup in Indianapolis, all of the draft prospects were given checkups by their local doctors, either virtually or in over-the-phone visits, which were then shared with teams that couldn't evaluate those players in person.  For players who opted out of playing the 2020 college season, prepping for video interviews with potential employers has been as important as training for drills.  Parsons had 109 tackles and was an all-American as a sophomore in 2019, so he trusted that film of his game performance would show him as an elite competitor. But he said he faced questions about why he opted out last August as well as lingering character concerns stemming from a 2018 hazing accusation against him and other Penn State players made by a former teammate. Parsons's accuser filed a lawsuit against Coach James Franklin and the university, claiming the coach ignored the claims. The university investigated the claims and took them to the Centre County, Pa., district attorney, who declined to bring charges. Penn State has filed for the suit to be dismissed.  In his video interviews with teams, Parsons sometimes talked with just one person and at other times with a team's entire defensive unit. He told evaluators that the health of his 2-year-old son, Malcolm, was his biggest concern in opting out, a response he said some teams easily accepted, while others pushed harder.  Parsons said he had been more adamant, though, in addressing concerns over his character, emphasizing that once a team drafts him and interacts with him in person daily those concerns will be resolved.  ''It made me want to show how much of a hard worker I am and how good of a father I am,'' said Parsons, who will attend the draft in Cleveland on April 29 with Malcolm in tow. ''I'm going to make sure I never put myself in a situation that is going to dictate my future or put the team in jeopardy.''  Micah Parsons, a 21-year-old linebacker from Penn State, sat out the 2020 season but is still expected to be a first-round selection. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BARRY REEGER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00047 "
464		"    Here to Help; Vanessa Friedman Answers Your Style Questions  By Vanessa Friedman  462 words 19 April 2021   3     I have always had a large bust, but I am about to undergo a bilateral mastectomy. I do not intend to undergo any reconstruction. I want to try to make the best of this transition and embrace the fashion options a flat chest offers woman that were never available to me. I am looking for casual ideas that will make me feel good about my new silhouette. What do you suggest?  Laurie, Cape Cod, Mass.  First, I am sorry for your diagnosis and admire your strength in framing the experience as an opportunity to experiment with a different sense of self; that what is happening to you is not simply about a loss. It is true that there is a certain kind of liberty in a flat chest, and clothes can help make that real.  As the author of the blog Flatter Fashion, a British site run by a woman who also opted to forgo reconstruction after a double mastectomy, wrote in her original post a few years ago: ''Your chest does not define your identity. Loss of your breast form does not mean you have to lose your personal style.'' It just may mean you redefine it -- and try looks that previously were not accessible to you.  A good friend in Paris who is one of the most stylish women I know and who also had a curvy figure and underwent a mastectomy a few years ago, said: ''The good thing about having less or no breast is that clothes fall well on your body and it looks more elegant. The idea is to enjoy wearing everything you couldn't wear when you had breasts.''  She said she had become a proponent of men's wear dressing, whether it was a blouson shirt tucked in to create a waist or a sheer top over a cotton vest, like this swiss-dot version from Shein. She also began channeling women like Jane Birkin and Charlotte Rampling, with their throwaway chic.  And my French friend -- like a fashion editor I know who for years wore a uniform of jeans or black trousers with a button-up shirt -- started shopping in the boys department at classic retailers like Brooks Brothers, putting her own twist of casual insouciance on tradition.  You may have a new body with a new shape, but sometimes old clothes, like old friends, are just the hug you need.  Every week in the Open Thread newsletter -- a look from across The Times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share -- The Times's chief fashion critic, Vanessa Friedman, answers a reader's fashion-related question. Sign up for Open Thread at nytimes.com/newsletters.  Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00042 "
465		"   IN HER WORDS  Orthodox Women In Ambulance Corps Challenge Traditions  By Emma Goldberg and Yana Paskova  2,929 words 19 April 2021   14     ''Whatever happens to me, I do this to help people.''  -- Charna Goldsmith, an E.M.T. with the group Ezras Nashim  To hear more audio stories from publishers like The new_york_times, download Audm for iPhone or Android .  The test presented itself, as tests so often do, on a completely ordinary day.  Charna Goldsmith was driving with her family on the Belt Parkway. Her attention was pulled in multiple directions at once -- from her children crying in the back seat to her mental catalog of errands. The Brooklyn air was heavy with midsummer heat. The parkway was, as usual, congested.  But up ahead, a four-car pileup was snarling traffic more than usual. And in the first car, a man, roughly 300 pounds by Mrs. Goldsmith's estimate, seemed to be unconscious at the wheel. There was no ambulance in sight.  It was the summer of 2019 and Mrs. Goldsmith had just concluded months of training as an emergency medical technician -- much to the chagrin of her husband and other members of her Orthodox Jewish community. But suddenly, her skills were needed.  Her husband turned to her. ''Um, hello,'' he said. ''You can help him!''  She grabbed her emergency supply kit and leapt out of the car, leaving her young son and newborn daughter with her husband. She managed to place a cervical collar on the injured driver, stabilizing his spine until the rescue workers arrived five minutes later. Once the Fire Department started tending to him, Mrs. Goldsmith got back in the car -- feeling shaken, but with a new jolt of confidence -- and her family continued home.  Mrs. Goldsmith is one of dozens of Orthodox Jewish women in New York City who have trained and begun working as E.M.T.s in recent years, providing services separate from those of the 911 network. In doing so, they've challenged their community's conception of the role women can play in public and professional life.  For decades, the Orthodox Jewish community has relied on its own E.M.T. services through the volunteer ambulance group Hatzalah. But because Hatzalah has an all-male local E.M.T. force, Orthodox women -- who might want to preserve their modesty, even in medical emergencies -- have not always been able to get proper medical care.  The women's E.M.T. services are coordinated by a nonprofit organization, Ezras Nashim, which was established in 2014 to serve Orthodox women. It was founded by Judge Rachel Freier, known as Ruchie, and its launch got a frosty reception in the Orthodox community. Many saw the group's members as agitators, upending gender norms for no good reason.  But in the last year, as the number of calls to the organization have ticked up, members of Ezras Nashim have all but made their case that the need for more emergency medical responders is crucial -- especially in a community hit so hard by Covid-19.  But tensions remain: When the E.M.T.s were doing a drill from their ambulance on a busy Brooklyn street in October, one Orthodox man stopped to tease them (jokingly, some of them said).  ''Maris ayin!'' he called out to the female E.M.T.s. That's a concept, in Judaism, that suggests one person doing something seemingly (though not technically) prohibited by Jewish law might encourage others who see it to follow their lead.  Why Call a Woman for Help?  Judge Freier is the type of woman whose name, when mentioned in the neighborhood of Borough Park in Brooklyn, tends to inspire an outpouring of stories. Many Orthodox families have memories of receiving help from Judge Freier, whether in her capacity as a community advocate, before she became a judge, or as a neighbor delivering food and medicine to friends in need.  So it's not surprising that in the summer of 2011, when a small group of Orthodox women needed advice, they turned to her. They told Judge Freier that they had decided to train as E.M.T.s together, completing independent courses outside the Orthodox community, but they hadn't been able to put their skills to use. They were being blocked from joining Hatzalah, whose local affiliates do not accept female volunteers.  The women knew that challenging Hatzalah's gender divide wouldn't be well received. Hatzalah is renowned in the Jewish community; it started in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn in the 1960s, after a Hasidic man who had a heart attack died while waiting for an ambulance. That inspired a group of Orthodox men to create their own emergency response system, composed of volunteers and separate from the Fire Department and hospital E.M.T.s who respond to 911 calls. It now has chapters across the globe.  New York doctors say that the service Hatzalah provides is high quality -- and that it fosters trust. ''The amount of faith that the Orthodox Jewish community has in Hatzalah's leadership, drivers and volunteers is remarkable,'' said Dr. Dara Kass, an emergency physician.  State officials agree. ''Community-based volunteer services are an important extension of the health care network,'' said Gary Holmes, a spokesman for the New York State Department of Health.  So Judge Freier wondered: With such trusted emergency medical providers on hand, why did the community need female E.M.T.s?  But she concluded that God must have connected her with these women seeking to become E.M.T.s for a reason. She began researching the issue, and was disturbed to hear accounts from dozens of Orthodox women who had delayed calling for medical help because they were uncomfortable being seen by men while undressed or in an immodest condition. In other words, their lives were being put at risk.  ''Women were traumatized when they gave birth and saw 10 men invading their bathroom,'' she recalled. ''I saw women turn pale, like a ghost, just reliving the trauma.''  As Judge Freier heard these stories, she began to think it was clear that Hatzalah should accept female volunteers. But many of the local rabbis, some of whom seemed to face pressure from Hatzalah, said they didn't agree. And the more she brought it up, the more she heard condemnations, ridicule and even threats. Members of Hatzalah told her it wasn't appropriate for men and women to work side by side.  After a year of trying to make her case, Judge Freier decided to take a new approach: If Hatzalah wouldn't take female E.M.T.s, then the women should start their own group.  She began raising money to buy emergency medical supplies and contacted local health officials to learn the steps involved in forming a Basic Life Support First Response Agency, which has the authority to dispatch its own E.M.T.s. ''Every time I confronted a hurdle, God sent somebody who would help me overcome it,'' Judge Freier said.  In 2014, she launched her own group, which took in the women already trained as E.M.T.s and coordinated training for new volunteers. She named it Ezras Nashim, which in Hebrew has a double meaning: It translates to ''assisting women'' and is also a term for the women's section of a synagogue.  Almost immediately, the calls for help began to pour in, on a phone line Judge Freier had publicized with the help of dozens of volunteers. They received calls from women in labor. Elderly women who had fallen in the shower. Women who sustained burns from cooking.  ''When a woman is in a compromised state, in her weakest moment, having another woman there is a big help,'' said Sarah Weisshaus, 28, an E.M.T. with Ezras Nashim.  During one of Ms. Weisshaus's first emergency shifts, she arrived at the home of an Orthodox woman giving birth. She found the woman in the bathtub screaming, ''I'm pushing.''  Ms. Weisshaus urged her to breathe deeply and get in a better birthing position inside the bathtub. She could tell that the woman, vulnerable and undressed, was comforted by the presence of another woman. Almost immediately, a tiny head emerged, and Ms. Weisshaus caught the baby.  As Ms. Weisshaus answered emergency calls, she thought of a cousin who had died after putting off a call to Hatzalah. ''She was in the shower, one of her veins burst and she was undressed so she didn't want to call her local E.M.S.,'' Ms. Weisshaus said. ''She called her husband instead and by the time he got home she was dead.''  The Opposition  Last year, Ezras Nashim's phone line received some 475 calls, up from 428 in 2019. The group has now expanded to include more than 45 Brooklyn-based E.M.T.s and raised money for supplies from women in the Orthodox community. But one of its earliest challenges still remains: lack of community buy-in.  From the outset, many men in the community worried that the female E.M.T.s were trying to subvert Orthodox Jewish gender norms by having women do work typically performed by men. On social media and on street corners, they speculated that the women were motivated by feminism, not modesty. Some, especially Hatzalah's volunteers, said the members of Ezras Nashim were just trying to ''pick a fight,'' according to Judge Freier. Much of this pushback came from the Hasidic community, an insular subset of Orthodox Jews; Judge Freier is Hasidic, though many of Ezras Nashim's volunteers are from the wider Orthodox community.  ''People would go to the rabbinical leadership and say, 'These women are not good, they're doing this as part of some radical feminist agenda,''' Judge Freier said. ''When they presented us to the rabbis that way, the rabbis didn't like it.''  Hatzalah did not respond to requests for comment. Ezras Nashim's leaders said the vocal pushback from Hatzalah members had largely subsided, especially in the past year.  Judge Freier and her daughter, Leah Levine, who is the group's director of outreach and development, said they countered the skepticism by emphasizing that they don't see themselves as people who oppose ancient tradition.  ''My mother and I don't use the word 'feminist' to describe ourselves,'' said Mrs. Levine, 22. ''When people say 'feminist,' that means that women want to be equal to men. But my mother always says she's happy with the way God divided it, and gave men their roles and women their own separate roles.''  The goal, as Mrs. Levine sees it, is simply to make sure women get proper medical attention, and preserve their dignity. ''There are women endangering their lives because they're embarrassed to have men look at them,'' she said.  Adina Sash, 33, sees it a bit differently. She became a volunteer E.M.T. for the group partly because she was frustrated that Hatzalah didn't allow women in its ranks.  ''They're the heroes of the Orthodox community,'' she said. ''When you have a member of your family who is part of Hatzalah, that comes with street cred. It's a symbol of pride.''  Ideally, Ms. Sash said, Orthodox women would be able to join any E.M.T. group they'd like, instead of having to start their own. She acknowledges she is more progressive than Ezras Nashim's leadership.  Still, Ms. Sash said, she sees Judge Freier as a role model. She's showing Orthodox women that they can be medical providers, regardless of what traditional groups like Hatzalah permit.  The Ambulance Battle  Even after Ezras Nashim got its license and started taking calls, the battle wasn't quite over. The group needed its own ambulance.  For years, the women had been driving to medical emergencies in their own cars, responding to the patient's needs and then calling 911 if transport to the hospital was needed. Having an ambulance would allow the E.M.T.s to take severely sick to hospitals themselves instead of waiting for the Fire Department to step in.  The notion that Ezras Nashim could begin operating its own ambulance set off a fresh wave of criticism from members of Hatzalah, who revived their argument that a women's group wasn't needed. Hatzalah's representatives pointed out that their group had a speedier average response time -- two minutes, compared with Ezras Nashim's eight minutes and two seconds. (The women said they could cut down that time if they had their own ambulance.)  More community pushback followed, but in 2019 Ezras Nashim filed an application for an ambulance license with the Regional Emergency Medical Services Council of New York, a nonprofit that coordinates city medical services. It denied Ezras Nashim's bid by a 12-to-7 vote, falling short of the 14-vote majority needed for the permit. Ezras Nashim's volunteers noted that several of the men who voted against their group had ties to Hatzalah, either as onetime volunteers or as friends of Hatzalah workers.  But Ezras Nashim appealed the decision to the New York State Emergency Medical Services Council, and in August 2020 -- a year after they had first applied and as Covid-19 was tearing through their community -- the state council voted in favor of Ezras Nashim, by a margin of 23 to 2.  Mrs. Levine and the other volunteers shouted with joy when they heard the news. The group was set to get its own ambulance, at last.  Two months later, a dozen members of the group gathered on a street corner near their homes in Brooklyn to celebrate the ambulance's arrival. It was a crisp day, the streets bustling with Sunday shoppers, when the siren rang out in the distance, the driver's greeting for the women.  ''Did you hear that?'' Mrs. Levine said, wearing a purple vest emblazoned with the group's name and phone number. ''That's ours. It's our ambulance.''  'God Should Grant You Luck'  At some points last year, predominantly Orthodox Jewish neighborhoods had coronavirus test positivity rates seven times that of New York City's overall rate. Everyone in Ezras Nashim knew people sickened with Covid-19; most knew people who died. For the E.M.T.s, days and nights bled into one another, all marked by calls for emergency help.  ''I was petrified,'' Mrs. Levine said. ''You didn't know who was going to be next.''  Some of the patients were so sick that there was little the E.M.T.s could do once they arrived on the scene.  In one instance, Mrs. Goldsmith drove to a woman's home and found her unresponsive. Wearing full protective equipment, Mrs. Goldsmith started doing chest compressions. When Fire Department workers arrived, and after several rounds of CPR, they determined the woman could not be resuscitated and called her time of death. Mrs. Goldsmith had to deliver the news to the woman's son by phone.  ''It was terrifying,'' she said. ''We were wearing gowns, goggles, face shields, and I was eight months pregnant. It was traumatizing.''  For Mrs. Goldsmith, the crisis turned even more personal when her husband fell sick with Covid-19, though he swiftly recovered. ''I've been directly exposed dozens of times,'' she added. ''Whatever happens to me, I do this to help people.''  Then the vaccines arrived like a miracle, like a testament to their faith -- just as the ambulance had felt.  On a frigid Sunday morning in January, hundreds of E.M.T.s from various city organizations gathered in the Midwood section of Brooklyn for a long-awaited day: to receive a Covid-19 vaccine.  Judge Freier, who was one of a dozen people administering the shots, sat on the second floor of a warehouse-style building, greeting each E.M.T. who walked through the door with the same set of queries: ''Do you have any allergies?'' ''Are you afraid of shots?'' Then she assembled a syringe, while they rolled up their sleeves.  In that airy space, brimming with masked E.M.T.s beaming with relief, the members of Ezras Nashim who had lined up for vaccines blended into the crowd. There were members of Hatzalah and members of non-Jewish medical groups. Some of the Hatzalah volunteers recognized Judge Freier and nodded in greeting; some thanked her for her community work.  After each injection, she offered the same well wishes. ''God should grant you luck and blessings,'' she said. ''And may you continue your work.''  In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox . Write to us at inherwords@nytimes.com .  In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox. Write to us at inherwords@nytimes.com.  RACHEL FREIER, the founder of Ezras Nashim.; LEAH LEVINE, 22, who is Mrs. Freier's daughter and the group's director of outreach and development. (A14); An Ezras Nashim magnet at the group's Brooklyn office, above. The E.M.T. trainee Allison Deal, right, tending to a fellow trainee, Sara Honikman, on the floor, as part of an exercise. Far right, the founder of Ezras Nashim, Rachel Freier, center, and Miriam Milder, an E.M.T., during a wellness check house call in Brooklyn.; After dealing with community pushback, Ezras Nashim finally got its own ambulance last year. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY YANA PASKOVA FOR THE new_york_times) (A14-A15)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00041 "
466		"    How a Tiny Kingdom Out-Vaccinated Most of the World  By Chencho Dema and Mike Ives  1,250 words 19 April 2021   4     The Himalayan nation has given more than 60 percent of its people a shot. Some villages were reached by helicopter, and health workers hiked through ice and snow.  THIMPHU, Bhutan -- The Lunana area of Bhutan is remote even by the standards of an isolated Himalayan kingdom: It covers an area about twice the size of New York City, borders far western China, includes glacial lakes and some of the world's highest peaks, and is inaccessible by car.  Still, most people living there have already received a coronavirus vaccine.  Vials of the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine arrived last month by helicopter and were distributed by health workers, who walked from village to village through snow and ice. Vaccinations proceeded in the area's 13 settlements even after yaks damaged some of the field tents that volunteers had set up for patients.  ''I got vaccinated first to prove to my fellow villagers that the vaccine does not cause death and is safe to take,'' Pema, a village leader in Lunana who is in his 50s and goes by one name, said by telephone. ''After that, everyone here took the jab.''  Lunana's campaign is part of a quiet vaccine success story in one of Asia's poorest countries. As of Saturday, Bhutan, a Buddhist kingdom that has emphasized its citizens' well-being over national prosperity, had administered a first vaccine dose to more than 478,000 people, over 60 percent of its population. The Health Ministry said this month that more than 93 percent of eligible adults had received their first shots.  The vast majority of Bhutan's first doses were administered at about 1,200 vaccination centers over a weeklong period in late March and early April. As of Saturday, the country's vaccination rate of 63 doses per 100 people was the sixth highest in the world, according to a new_york_times database.  That rate was ahead of those of Britain and the United States, more than seven times that of neighboring India and nearly six times the global average. Bhutan is also ahead of several other geographically isolated countries with small populations, including Iceland and the Maldives.  Dasho Dechen Wangmo, Bhutan's health minister, attributed its success to ''leadership and guidance'' from the country's king, public solidarity, a general absence of vaccine hesitancy, and a primary health care system that ''enabled us to take the services even to the most remote parts of the country.''  ''Being a small country with a population of just over 750,000, a two-week vaccination campaign was doable,'' Ms. Dechen Wangmo said in an email. ''Minor logistic issues were faced during the vaccination but were all manageable.''  All of the doses used so far were donated by the government of India, where the drug is known as Covishield and manufactured by the Serum Institute of India, the world's largest vaccine producer. Bhutan's government has said it plans to administer second doses about eight to 12 weeks after the first round, in line with guidelines for the AstraZeneca vaccine.  Will Parks, the representative in Bhutan for UNICEF, the United Nations agency for children, said the first round was a ''success story, not only in terms of the coverage but also in the way the vaccination drive was executed collectively from the planning to the implementation.''  ''It involved participation from the highest authority to local community,'' he said.  The campaign has relied in part on a corps of volunteers, known as the Guardians of the Peace, who operate under the authority of Bhutan's king, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck.  In Lunana, eight volunteers pitched field tents and helped carry oxygen tanks from village to village, said Karma Tashi, a member of the government's four-person vaccination team there. The tanks were a precaution in case any villagers had adverse reactions to the shots.  To save time, Mr. Tashi said, the team administered vaccines by day and walked between villages by night -- often for 10 to 14 hours at a time.  The yak damage to the tents wasn't the only hiccup. Some villagers did not initially show up to be vaccinated because they were busy harvesting barley, or because they worried about possible side effects. ''But after we told them about the benefits, they agreed,'' Mr. Tashi said.  As of April 12, 464 of Lunana's 800 or so residents had gotten a first dose, according to government data. The population figure includes minors who are not eligible for vaccines.  Health care in Bhutan, a landlocked country that is slightly larger than Maryland and borders Tibet, is free. Between 1960 and 2014, life expectancy there more than doubled, to 69.5 years, according to the World Health Organization. Immunization levels in recent years have been above 95 percent.  But Bhutan's health system is ''hardly self-sustainable,'' and patients who need expensive or sophisticated treatments are often sent to India or Thailand at the government's expense, said Dr. Yot Teerawattananon, a Thai health economist at the National University of Singapore.  A government committee in Bhutan meets once a week to make decisions about which patients to send overseas for treatment, Dr. Yot said. He said the committee -- which focuses on brain and heart surgery, kidney transplants and cancer treatment -- was known informally as the ''death panel.''  ''I don't think they could cope with the surge of severe Covid cases if that happened, so it is important for them to prioritize Covid vaccination,'' he said, referring to Bhutan's health authorities.  Bhutan has reported fewer than 1,000 coronavirus infections and only one death. Its borders, tight by global standards even before the pandemic, have been closed for a year with few exceptions, and anyone who enters the country must quarantine for 21 days.  That includes the prime minister, Lotay Tshering, who received his first vaccine dose last month while in quarantine after a visit to Bangladesh. He has been supporting the vaccination effort in recent weeks on his official Facebook page.  ''My days are dotted with virtual meetings on numerous areas that need attention, as I closely follow the vaccination campaign on the ground,'' Dr. Tshering, a surgeon, wrote in early April. ''So far, with your prayers and blessings, everything is going well.''  The economy in Lunana depends on animal husbandry and harvests of a so-called caterpillar fungus that is prized as an aphrodisiac in China. People speak Dzongkha, the national language, and a local dialect.  Last year, the drama ''Lunana: A Yak in the Classroom'' became the second film ever selected to represent Bhutan at the Academy Awards. It was filmed using solar batteries, and its cast included local villagers.  Lunana's headman, Kaka, who goes by one name, said the most important part of the vaccination campaign was not on the ground, but in the sky.  ''If there hadn't been a chopper,'' he said, ''getting the vaccines would have been an issue, since there's no access road.''  Chencho Dema reported from Thimphu, and Mike Ives from Hong Kong.  Above, inoculating a Buddhist monk at a school in Thimphu, Bhutan's capital. Left, helicopters were key for distributing the vaccine to mountainous areas. Below, a Buddhist ritual as the vaccine arrived in Lhuntse, in an image posted to Facebook by the government. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY UPASANA DAHAL/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; BHUTAN MINISTRY OF HEALTH)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003y "
467		"    Soccer's Rich Make a Move To Get Richer  By Tariq Panja  1,791 words 19 April 2021   1     Real Madrid, Manchester United, Liverpool and Juventus are among the dozen founding members of a league that would upend the sport's structures and economics.  LONDON -- A dozen of the world's richest and most storied soccer clubs on Sunday announced that they had formed a breakaway European club competition that would, if it comes to fruition, upend the structures, economics and relationships that have bound global soccer for nearly a century.  After months of secret talks, the breakaway teams -- which include Real Madrid and Barcelona in Spain; Manchester United and Liverpool in England; and Juventus and A.C. Milan in Italy -- confirmed their plans late Sunday. They said they planned to add at least three more founding members, hold midweek matches that would put the league in direct competition with the existing Champions League, and begin play ''as soon as practicable.''  ''We will help football at every level and take it to its rightful place in the world,'' said Real Madrid's president, Florentino Pérez, who was named the first chairman of what the clubs were calling the Super League.  The league they have agreed to form -- an alliance of top clubs closer in concept to closed leagues like the N.F.L. and the N.B.A. than soccer's current model -- would bring about the most significant restructuring of elite European soccer since the 1950s, and could herald the largest transfer of wealth to a small set of teams in modern sports history.  In its current form, European soccer supplements domestic league play -- an English league for English teams, a Spanish one for Spanish clubs -- with Continental competitions between the best clubs. The most prestigious of those, the Champions League, brings together the best teams from each domestic league each year to play for the title of Europe's, and arguably the world's, best club.  The current system funnels hundreds of millions of dollars of annual television and sponsorship revenue to the world's richest clubs, which supplement their domestic revenue with multimillion-dollar payouts from the Champions League. But the format also sustains smaller teams in each country, which benefit from the gloss of their encounters with the giants and share in the money those teams bring in from broadcasters.  The new superleague model would change that, by stripping the Champions League of its most attractive and most successful teams and effectively walling off the richest clubs in their own closed competition -- and allowing them to split the billions of dollars in annual revenue among themselves. According to the Super League's announcement, the founding clubs will split 3.5 billion euros (almost $4.2 billion) for signing on to establish ''a sustainable financial foundation.'' The per-team figure means each founding club will receive about $400 million -- more than four times what the Champions League winner took home in 2020.  The 12 teams that signed up as founders are, for the moment, limited to a dozen clubs from Spain, Italy and England. A cohort of six teams from the Premier League -- United, Liverpool, Manchester City, Arsenal, Chelsea and Tottenham -- represents the biggest grouping from a single country. Atlético Madrid is the other team from Spain that is said to have endorsed the project, while the Milan rivals Internazionale and A.C. Milan would join Juventus as Italy's representatives.  Three more clubs will join as founding -- and thus permanent -- members, organizers said, and a qualifying mechanism will be created to fill the five other places in the 20-team Super League each season.  A women's league will be started as well, the announcement said, presumably including the women's sides of many of the same clubs.  European soccer officials moved quickly to try to block the project. The Premier League condemned the concept in a statement on Sunday and also sent a letter to its 20 member clubs warning them not to take part. Officials at European soccer's governing body, UEFA, which runs the Champions League, labeled the proposal for a closed superleague a ''cynical project'' in a statement.  The missive was co-signed by the Premier League, La Liga in Spain and Italy's Serie A, as well as the soccer federations of each country. Within hours, France's federation and the French league had added their voices to the growing opposition inside key European soccer circles. Politicians, including Britain's prime minister, Boris Johnson, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, also weighed in to denounce the plans.  But UEFA was taking the threat seriously. Its leaders spent the weekend in discussions about how to block the plan, including banning the breakaway teams from their domestic leagues and blocking their players from competing for their national teams in events like the World Cup. European officials also pointedly reminded the prospective superleague clubs (and, effectively, their players) that soccer's global governing body, FIFA, has backed their threats of expulsion.  FIFA on Sunday expressed its ''disapproval'' of the concept of a closed league, but refrained from the type of threats being lobbed by top officials in Europe.  ''We will consider all measures available to us, at all levels, both judicial and sporting in order to prevent this happening,'' the UEFA statement said. ''Football is based on open competitions and sporting merit; it cannot be any other way.''  At the same time, soccer officials also began contacting lawmakers at the European Union, hoping the bloc would be able to strengthen its hand in preserving the status quo.  The leaders of the breakaway group have been trying to get other top teams, like Germany's Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund and the French champion Paris St.-Germain, to commit. But to date those clubs -- and others -- have declined to walk away from the domestic structures and continental competitions that have underpinned European soccer for generations.  Their concerns can be political and financial. P.S.G.'s president, Nasser al-Khelaifi, sits on the UEFA board, for example, and also heads beIN Media Group, the Qatar-based television network that has paid millions of dollars for the broadcast rights to games in the Champions League and various domestic competitions.  The Premier League wrote to its 20 clubs after its board meeting on Sunday, though, warning the teams that the league's rules bar clubs from joining outside competitions without approval.  ''This venture cannot be launched without English clubs and we call upon any club contemplating associating themselves or joining this venture to walk away immediately before irreparable damage is done,'' it said in a letter to the teams.  The timing of Sunday's news appeared designed to overshadow UEFA's plan to ratify a newly designed Champions League on Monday. That competition would be ravaged by the departure of its biggest teams.  The repercussions of a split between European soccer and its best-known, best-followed and most deep-pocketed clubs would be seismic. Without the top teams, UEFA and the domestic leagues would face demands for millions of dollars in refunds from the broadcasters who pay billions for television rights to air their tournaments. The clubs left out would face a serious blow to their budgets while many are still wrestling with the financial wreckage caused by the coronavirus pandemic. And any ban on national team play would affect players individually, even if they had no role in the decision-making.  Among the most notable teams involved in the breakaway group is Juventus, the serial Italian champion. Its chairman, Andrea Agnelli, had been until Sunday -- when he resigned from both posts -- a member of UEFA's executive board and also the head of the European Club Association, an umbrella body for more than 200 top division clubs, the majority of which will be left out of the proposed Super League.  When asked by The new_york_times this year to discuss his role in the talks of a breakaway league, Agnelli brushed off the idea as a ''rumor.''  Still, according to documents reviewed by The Times in January, plans for the breakaway league had gathered pace since last summer. Top clubs sought to take advantage of uncertainty in the soccer industry caused by the pandemic to forge a new path that would ensure a degree of financial stability for them but would also almost certainly lead to a significant -- and potentially devastating -- loss in value and revenue for the teams excluded from the project.  Each of the would-be permanent members of the proposed superleague was promised 350 million euros, or $425 million, to sign up, the documents said. The group leading the effort had entered into discussions with JPMorgan Chase to raise financing for the project, according to people with knowledge of the matter. The firm has so far declined to comment.  Earlier this year, UEFA found a powerful ally in opposition to the plans in FIFA, which warned that any player who took part in such an unsanctioned league would be barred from appearing in any of its tournaments, including the World Cup. The statement came after UEFA's president, Aleksander Ceferin, demanded support from his FIFA counterpart, Gianni Infantino, amid mounting speculation that the breakaway group had FIFA's support.  By Sunday night, even the alliance of clubs led by Juventus's Agnelli, the E.C.A., appeared to reject his idea.  Significant hurdles to the plan's implementation remain. Governing bodies and leagues could follow through on their threats to expel the clubs and their players. As member-owned clubs, Barcelona and Real Madrid would most likely require the support of the thousands of their supporters before formally joining, and any German clubs that agree to take part would face similar obstacles. All can expect heavy internal opposition, too; fan groups across Europe have consistently opposed even the idea of a closed superleague.  On Sunday, one umbrella fan group, Football Supporters Europe, called the superleague idea ''illegitimate, irresponsible, and anti-competitive by design.''  ''More to the point, it is driven exclusively by greed,'' the group said. ''The only ones who stand to gain are hedge funds, oligarchs and a handful of already wealthy clubs, many of which perform poorly in their own domestic leagues despite their inbuilt advantage.''  Real Madrid and Liverpool, both members of a breakaway league, met on Wednesday in the Champions League, which stands to take a hit from the new league. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL ELLIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES); Andrea Agnelli, chairman of Juventus, which is also part of the Super League. Earlier this year, Mr. Agnelli, who was a member of UEFA's executive board, brushed off talk of the league as a ''rumor.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY MASSIMO PINCA/REUTERS) (A12)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003x "
468		"    This Week on TV  By Gabe Cohn  1,142 words 19 April 2021   2     This year's Academy Awards ceremony airs on ABC. And PBS airs a three-part documentary pegged to Earth Day.  Between network, cable and streaming, the modern television landscape is a vast one. Here are some of the shows, specials and movies coming to TV this week, April 19-25. Details and times are subject to change.  Monday  THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA (1958) 6:30 p.m. on TCM. A new documentary about Ernest Hemingway from Ken Burns and Lynn Novick has Hemingway back in the spotlight (in certain circles, at least). A few years before his death in 1961, the directors John Sturges and Fred Zinnemann came out with this Hollywood adaptation of Hemingway's famous novella ''The Old Man and the Sea.'' Spencer Tracy plays the old man of the title, an aging fisher who scuffles with an enormous marlin in Cuban waters. Tracy gives ''an affecting demonstration of primal fortitude,'' Bosley Crowther wrote in his 1958 review for The new_york_times. But the film at large is flawed, Crowther said, in part because ''an essential feeling of the sweep and surge of the open sea is not achieved in precise and placid pictures that obviously were shot in a studio tank.'' Call it imitation crab.  SELMA (2014) 5:20 p.m. on FXM. David Oyelowo -- whose directorial debut, ''The Water Man,'' is expected to be released early next month -- plays the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in this historical drama about civil rights activists' famous march from Selma, Ala., to Montgomery in 1965. Oyelowo is accompanied by a formidable ensemble cast, which includes Oprah Winfrey, AndrÃ© Holland, Wendell Pierce, Tessa Thompson and Lorraine Toussaint. Ava DuVernay, who directed, ''writes history with passionate clarity and blazing conviction,'' A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The Times. ''Even if you think you know what's coming,'' Scott added, '''Selma' hums with suspense and surprise.''  Tuesday  INDEPENDENT LENS: PHILLY D.A. 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Philadelphia's district attorney, Larry Krasner, is part of a wave of progressive prosecutors who have been elected across the country in recent years. This multipart documentary from the filmmakers Ted Passon and Yoni Brook, airing as part of PBS's ''Independent Lens'' series, looks at the inner workings of Krasner's office and the ways he and his team pursue criminal-justice reform.  Wednesday  SKYFALL (2012) 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. on BBC America. A year has gone by since life changed, and expectations shifted, for us all. This refers, of course, to the delay of ''No Time To Die,'' the newest James Bond movie, which was supposed to come out in April 2020 before being postponed by the pandemic. It's now planned for release this fall. In the meantime, fans can revisit this highly regarded entry in the decades-old franchise, which pits Daniel Craig's Bond against a tech-fluent villain played by Javier Bardem.  Thursday  GRETA THUNBERG: A YEAR TO CHANGE THE WORLD 8 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Thursday is Earth Day. After audiences potentially do something proactive on behalf of the environment, they can settle down, relax and watch this three-part documentary about the climate activist Greta Thunberg. While the program, produced by the BBC, bears Thunberg's name, it's not a biography; it focuses on her conversations with an array of climate experts, with whom she shares the screen. ''You are listening to me right now, but I don't want that,'' Thunberg says at the start. ''I don't want you to listen to me -- I want you to listen to the science.''  Friday  A BLACK LADY SKETCH SHOW 11 p.m. on HBO. The first season of this show, created by Robin Thede and co-executive produced by Issa Rae, found comedy in a fake courtroom and an imagined, comically specific support group, in an airplane and at a wedding altar. The second season, which debuts Friday night, brings a fresh set of sketches and a slate of celebrity guests that includes the actress Gabrielle Union and the singer Miguel.  Saturday  MOANA (2016) 6:50 p.m. on Freeform. One of the beauties of animation is the way that it allows voice actors to step into characters completely different from themselves: Eddie Murphy can play a donkey; Owen Wilson can play a talking car. There's less of a gap between voice and onscreen presence with Dwayne Johnson's character in ''Moana,'' though: He plays an impossibly muscular version of the Polynesian demigod Maui whose biceps are about the size of his head. Maui accompanies Moana (AuliÊ»i Cravalho), the daughter of a village chief, on a quest to save her island, and the environment. In his review for The Times, A.O. Scott called the film's plot ''a mÃ©lange of updated folklore, contemporary eco-spiritualism and tried-and-true Disney-Pixar formula.'' There are, he added, ''some touching and amusing zigzags on the way to the film's sweet and affirmative conclusion.''  Sunday  THE OSCARS 8 p.m. on ABC. There are several ways that this year's Academy Awards ceremony could make history. There's a possibility that all four acting categories could be awarded to people of color. ChloÃ© Zhao, the filmmaker behind ''Nomadland,'' could become only the second woman to win an Academy Award for best director (and the first Chinese woman, and the first woman of color, to win that award). Regardless of the winners, this ceremony is recognizing films released during a year in which movie theaters were largely closed, and many big-budget films were pulled from release and pushed to future dates. The best picture nominees are ''Minari,'' ''Nomadland,'' ''Promising Young Woman,'' ''The Father,'' ''Judas and the Black Messiah,'' ''Mank,'' ''Sound of Metal'' and ''The Trial of the Chicago 7.'' For results and commentary throughout the evening, follow live coverage on The Times's app or website.  MY GRANDPARENTS' WAR 8 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Carey Mulligan is up for the best actress award at Sunday night's Oscars ceremony, for her role in ''Promising Young Woman.'' Over on PBS, she'll be featured in very different surroundings, as the guest on the Season 2 finale episode of ''My Grandparents' War.'' The program follows famous people as they learn about their grandparents' experiences during World War II. This episode finds Mulligan in Japan, where she explores her grandfather's time as a British naval officer.  Issa Rae, left, and Robin Thede in Season 2, Episode 1 of ''A Black Lady Sketch Show.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY HBO); Daniel Craig as James Bond in the 2012 film ''Skyfall,'' directed by Sam Mendes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRANCOIS DUHAMEL/COLUMBIA PICTURES AND MGM)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0004b "
469		"    Pandemic Buoys Older Books, Leaving New Authors in Limbo  By Alexandra Alter and Elizabeth A. Harris  1,587 words 19 April 2021   1     Will the shifts brought on by the pandemic, favoring online retailers over bookstores and established authors over new ones, change publishing forever?  When bookstores across the United States closed last spring, Tyrrell Mahoney, the president of Chronicle Books, braced for disaster as she watched revenue plummet. Then, months into the crisis, Chronicle found an unlikely savior: the rapper Snoop Dogg and his two-year-old cookbook.  ''From Crook to Cook'' sold 205,000 copies in 2020, nearly twice as many as it had sold in 2019. It was one of several older Chronicle titles with stronger-than-expected sales during the pandemic, and the company ended up making a profit last year.  ''It really was our backlist that saved the day for us,'' Ms. Mahoney said.  Despite what seemed like insurmountable challenges last year -- with bookstores closed, literary events canceled and publication dates postponed -- people kept buying books. As other pastimes like movies, theater and sports were put on hold during the shutdown, books turned out to be an ideal form of entertainment for quarantine.  But the tide did not rise for all authors and sellers. The pandemic altered how readers discover and buy books, and drove sales for celebrities and best-selling authors while new and lesser known writers struggled. Many of the 200-plus new books that Chronicle released failed to find an audience and quite likely never will.  ''It was harder to get people's attention around books that didn't necessarily have a big name attached to them,'' Ms. Mahoney said. ''Are those gone forever?''  Now publishers are wondering if the shifts brought on by the pandemic will change the book trade forever, and not all for the good.  How and where people buy books shifted dramatically, as homebound readers shopped online, driving a greater share of sales to Amazon and to big retailers like Target and Walmart. This mass consumer migration -- which was already underway but accelerated during the pandemic -- could have a profound impact on literary culture.  Unlike the serendipitous sense of discovery that comes with browsing a bookstore, people tend to search by author or subject matter when they shop online, limiting the titles they see. Often, they see whatever a search or algorithm delivers, or find themselves steered toward titles that retailers push because they are already selling well. As a result, many of the new books that were released in 2020 languished, as panicked retailers focused on brand-name authors and readers gravitated toward the most popular titles.  Amazon's top-selling book last year was Delia Owens's ''Where the Crawdads Sing,'' a novel published in 2018. Readers also snapped up familiar titles by established authors, like Suzanne Collins (''The Hunger Games'') and Jeff Kinney (''Diary of a Wimpy Kid''). Of the top 10 fiction best sellers in 2020, nine were by established, best-selling authors, NPD BookScan showed.  On the flip side, about 98 percent of the books that publishers released in 2020 sold fewer than 5,000 copies.  ''We sell pretty predictable things online,'' said James Daunt, the chief executive of Barnes & Noble, which saw a huge jump in online sales during the shutdown. ''Nothing wrong with predictable, but ultimately bookstores are places that drive discovery of new talent.''  Publishers now worry about the long-term health of physical bookstores, a critical part of the literary ecosystem that was battered during the shutdown. Bookstore sales fell nearly 30 percent in 2020, according to U.S. Census Bureau data.  Overall, publishers' revenues in the United States, which had been steady but stagnant for much of the past decade, climbed nearly 10 percent in 2020, to $8.6 billion, according to the Association of American Publishers.  Books about politics, race and racism and practical, domestic tasks like cooking were in high demand and drove nonfiction sales. Nonfiction titles for kids grew more than 23 percent as parents turned to books to educate their homebound children.  Audible, an audiobook producer and platform owned by Amazon, saw a burst of growth during the pandemic, as its users increased their listening hours by roughly 20 percent, to nearly 500 million hours, in 2020. On Goodreads, the number of books that people listed as having finished between April and December of last year grew by 40 percent, compared with the same period in 2019. And so far this year, print sales are up nearly 30 percent, according to NPD BookScan, the highest first-quarter sales since the company began tracking the data in 2004.  Many in the industry now wonder if the pandemic will provide a permanent boost, a moment like the ''Harry Potter'' phenomenon, when millions of new readers were brought into the fold. Others expect an inevitable decline as more people return to concerts, theaters, sporting events, schools and beaches.  As fear for their industry turned to a stunned optimism last year, publishers started to rethink almost everything they had once taken for granted, from how to cultivate new literary talent to the ways that they market and sell books. Live literary events like book signings and author appearances have been replaced, as with so many things, by Zoom. BookExpo, the largest gathering of publishing professionals in the United States, which typically took place in May and drew thousands of booksellers, publishers, editors, agents, authors and librarians to the Javits Center in New York, has been canceled. The convention center is now being used as a mass vaccination site.  ''One of the most significant things that's going to change is the re-evaluation of all that we do and how we do it,'' said Don Weisberg, the chief executive of Macmillan.  The loss of live author events all but wiped out a significant revenue stream for bookstores. Virtual events can draw bigger and more geographically diverse crowds, and they are cheaper for publishers, but online audiences often don't buy the book from the store that's hosting.  Gayle Shanks, co-owner of Changing Hands in Phoenix and Tempe, Ariz., said that at virtual book events, the store has sold as few as half a dozen books. At a really good virtual event, they might sell 150 copies -- but that same author, in person, might sell 1,000. Some publishers have started paying her stores to put on virtual events, she said, usually between $200 and $500, which is about comparable to what they would earn if they sold 20 to 50 books, she said.  Like the big retailers, independent bookstores were also flooded with online orders, a welcome surge of business when their doors were closed, but one they were poorly set up to manage -- some stores went from getting maybe a dozen orders a day to hundreds last spring. For many of them, the growth in online sales still wasn't enough.  ''Most of the stores didn't make any money last year,'' said Allison Hill, the chief executive of the American Booksellers Association, a trade group for independent stores.  Next month, Penguin Random House will start giving independent bookstores in the United States an extra month to pay their invoices in an effort to help them recover from the pandemic and stay in business in the long term.  Robert Sindelar, the managing partner of Third Place Books in Seattle, said fewer people had attended the store's virtual events as the pandemic dragged on. ''Everyone got Zoom fatigue,'' he said. The company's revenue fell 14 percent last year despite a spike in online sales.  As more readers shopped online, older titles accounted for two-thirds of all book sales in 2020, accelerating a shift that had previously been more gradual. A decade earlier, backlist titles comprised around half of all sales.  ''Our backlist was up tremendously -- people found what they wanted somehow,'' said Brian Murray, the president and chief executive of HarperCollins.  Meanwhile, the sales life cycles of some acclaimed debuts, which might have made a splash in another era, were cut short. Anticipated first novels like Jessica Anthony's ''Enter the Aardvark,'' Celia Laskey's ''Under the Rainbow'' and Callan Wink's ''August,'' all released last spring, struggled to find audiences.  Before the shutdown, Hilary Leichter's ''Temporary'' was shaping up to become one of the year's breakout debuts. It was nominated for the PEN/Hemingway Award and shortlisted for the 2020 Center for Fiction First Novel Prize, was praised by critics and became ubiquitous on ''best books of 2020'' lists. But the accolades surrounding the novel were not enough to overcome the obstacles the pandemic posed, after Ms. Leichter had to cancel a 10-city tour and appearances at literary festivals. In the end, it sold just a few thousand print copies. ''It was a bummer not to be able to push off of all that momentum,'' Ms. Leichter said.  Still, after releasing her first novel in the midst of a global crisis, she was thrilled to have an audience, no matter the size: ''I feel lucky and grateful that people found my book at all.''  Follow new_york_times Books on Facebook , Twitter and Instagram , sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar . And listen to us on the Book Review podcast .  The pandemic shutdown battered physical bookstores. (A1); In-person browsing allows for a sense of discovery that benefits new authors, while online searches point to titles already selling well. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE new_york_times) (A6)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003v "
470		"    As U.K. Mourns, Sinn Fein Apologizes For 1979 I.R.A. Strike on Philip's Uncle  By Mark Landler  799 words 19 April 2021   12     Mary Lou McDonald, leader of the party that was once the political wing of the paramilitary Irish Republican Army, said she was sorry for its assassination of Louis Mountbatten.  LONDON -- Seeking to salve an old wound at a time of sorrow for Britain's royal family, the political leader of the Irish republican movement apologized on Sunday for the 1979 assassination of Louis Mountbatten, an uncle of Prince Philip.  Mary Lou McDonald, the leader of Sinn Fein, which was once the political wing of the underground Irish Republican Army, told a London radio station, ''Of course, I am sorry that happened; of course, that is heartbreaking.''  Ms. McDonald offered the landmark apology a day after Queen Elizabeth II buried her husband, Philip, in a ceremony at Windsor Castle that paid tribute to his military career. His uncle Lord Mountbatten, a celebrated commander during World War II who later served as the last viceroy of India, overseeing its partition and transition to independence, was killed after a bomb exploded on his fishing boat off the coast of Ireland.  The assassination, carried out by members of the I.R.A., was one of the highest-profile attacks during the Northern Ireland Troubles, and the one that struck closest to the heart of the royal family. In addition to his ties to Philip, Lord Mountbatten was friendly with the queen and a mentor to the couple's eldest son, Prince Charles.  Speaking to Times Radio, Ms. McDonald said Sinn Fein was now engaged in peaceful politics. Asked if she would apologize to Charles for the assassination, she said that British armed forces had carried out violent acts in Northern Ireland but added that she regretted the killing of Lord Mountbatten.  ''It is all our jobs to ensure no other child, no other family, no matter who they are, suffers the same trauma and heartbreak that was all too common on all sides of this island and beyond,'' Ms. McDonald said. ''I am happy to reiterate that on the weekend that your queen buried her beloved husband.''  Lord Mountbatten was vacationing at his Irish home, Classiebawn Castle, in August 1979 when the I.R.A. placed a radio-controlled bomb on his boat, detonating it when he was several hundred yards offshore, lobster potting with members of his family.  In addition to Lord Mountbatten, the explosion killed Lady Brabourne, the mother-in-law of his elder daughter, Patricia; his 14-year-old grandson, Nicholas Knatchbull; and a friend, Paul Maxwell.  The I.R.A. quickly claimed responsibility for the attack, characterizing Lord Mountbatten, who had once led Britain's armed forces, as a legitimate target in its armed struggle against the British government. Gerry Adams, then a top official in Sinn Fein, said at the time, ''What the I.R.A. did to him is what Mountbatten had been doing all his life to other people.''  Mr. Adams later softened his position, without giving it up. After a meeting with Charles in 2015, he said both men had expressed regret for the bloodshed as the Troubles escalated after 1968. But he repeated his contention that Lord Mountbatten knew the risks of traveling to Ireland during that time.  ''I stand over what I said then,'' Mr. Adams said. ''I'm not one of those people that engages in revisionism. Thankfully the war is over.''  Sinn Fein is historically identified by its links to the Irish Republican Army, a legacy it has never been able to shake with older Irish people. But under Ms. McDonald's leadership, the party has successfully appealed to younger urban voters with policies to deal with Ireland's acute housing crisis.  In elections last year, Sinn Fein won roughly the same number of seats in Parliament as each of Ireland's two establishment parties, Fianna Fail and Fine Gael. Since neither wanted to form a government with Sinn Fein -- in part because of its I.R.A. legacy -- they agreed to enter into a formal governing coalition for the first time.  A senior diplomat noted that Sinn Fein's gesture brought it in line with the rest of Ireland, where the killing of Lord Mountbatten has long been condemned.  ''Sinn Fein's apology, even if belated, is a welcome step in helping to leave the past behind and build a better future on the island,'' said Bobby McDonagh, a former Irish ambassador to Britain.  Louis Mountbatten, left, and his nephew Prince Philip in 1965. Lord Mountbatten, a World War II commander, was assassinated in 1979 in an I.R.A. bombing that also killed three other people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUGLAS MILLER/KEYSTONE/HULTON ARCHIVE, VIA GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003r "
471		"   ON BASEBALL  Yankee Fans Are Still Waiting For a 'Capable' Team to Show Up  By Tyler Kepner  1,026 words 19 April 2021   1     Jay Bruce, a recent arrival, announced his retirement, and the Yankees fell to 5-10, with problems that seem deeper than their struggles with Tampa Bay.  The Yankees lost again on Sunday to Tampa Bay, 4-2, a drearily routine result in an oddly lopsided rivalry. The Rays pulled their usual pitching voodoo, with an opener drafted in the 45th round and a closer with no career saves. The pitcher who worked most of the game has one of the slowest fastballs in the sport.  This is what the Rays do, over and over, against the Yankees. They have won 18 of the last 23 games between the teams, dating to September 2019 and including last fall's victory in the division series. Even when the Yankees start Gerrit Cole, whom they lured with the richest pitching contract in baseball history, the Rays usually win.  Counting Sunday, the Yankees have won only two of Cole's six starts against Tampa Bay. The Yankees have three times the payroll of the Rays, but cannot break the spell of their anonymous pitching wizards.  ''No matter who they have going out here, typically Tampa is a challenging team; they're really good at limiting runs,'' Yankees Manager Aaron Boone said after the Rays held his offense to 11 hits in a weekend sweep. ''But we're also, by and large, healthy and obviously very capable.''  Is it obvious, though? By reputation and recent history, the Yankees should have a thunderous offense. They led the American League in runs per game in 2020 and brought almost everyone back. But as they've staggered to a 5-10 record this season, their problems have gone deeper than a frustrating matchup with the Rays.  As a team, they've played about the equivalent of a full season for a position player: 553 plate appearances, enough to qualify for a batting title. Their collective average is .210, with a .296 on-base percentage and a .346 slugging percentage.  Few players ever get the chance to be so bad for so long. Only one A.L. player in Boone's lifetime has had 550 plate appearances in a season with lower marks in average, on-base and slugging: Billy Ripken of the Baltimore Orioles in 1988. That was the year he posed for his infamous baseball card with an obscenity scrawled on the knob of his bat.  For Yankees fans, this team must inspire similar salty language. The Yankees have not started this poorly in 24 years, and besides the miserable hitting, they've been hurt by sloppy fielding and shaky starting pitching. In the 11 games not started by Cole, Yankees starters are 1-6 with a 6.39 earned run average.  In fairness, the Yankees are down a starter (Luis Severino), a slugger (Luke Voit) and a setup man (Zack Britton), who are all recovering from injuries. But almost every team is missing an impact player or two, and only one -- the Colorado Rockies -- has a worse record than the Yankees.  The calendar is their salvation, of course; the Yankees have not even played 10 percent of their 162-game schedule. But the angst is palpable: Fans pelted the field with baseballs on Friday, and then Boone voiced his displeasure to the team in a postgame clubhouse meeting. But the Yankees lost twice more.  ''I've been on some teams in Pittsburgh that were in the playoff hunt at the All-Star break and the wheels completely fell off in the second half, so it's a really long year, a lot can happen,'' said starter Jameson Taillon, adding that he was eager for his injured teammates to return.  ''I think everyone in the room has the belief that we're going to turn it around and we're going to be a really, really good team still. But at the same time, every game needs to have that urgency. We can't afford to just keep going about our business.''  The Yankees will make at least one roster move before Tuesday, when Taillon starts against Atlanta in the Bronx: First baseman Jay Bruce announced his retirement on Sunday. Bruce, a three-time All-Star, was hitting .118 with one homer and said he could no longer play to his standards. He made sure to sign the clubhouse wall, where everyone who has ever played for the Yankees is welcome to add his name.  ''I don't have a plan for what's next,'' said Bruce, 34, who hit 319 home runs, tied with Cecil and Prince Fielder (yep, they had the same total) on the career list. ''My son starts kindergarten in August, so I will be a shuttle service, at the very least.  ''As far as baseball goes -- I love baseball, anyone who knows me knows that I am such a big fan of baseball, I always have been. I go home at night and I watch baseball. Some people will think that's crazy, some people think it's awesome.''  It's awesome, no doubt -- and if Bruce really loves the sport, he'll stay up late to watch the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Diego Padres, especially when they play each other, as they did over the weekend. That rivalry is by far the most compelling one in the game; so much talent and personality bunched up the same division.  The Yankees-Rays games have felt vastly different because the Yankees have barely shown up. For now, they are their own biggest rival. They must hold their noses and keep slogging ahead.  ''We have too much experience and too many good players that have gone through adversity before to really be surprised by it,'' Cole said, adding, ''You're going to have to strap your boots on and wade through the mud.''  Gerrit Cole struck out 10 Rays, but took the loss on Sunday. (D1); Aaron Judge struck out seven times and went 1 for 12 over the weekend series with Tampa. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MIKE STOBE/GETTY IMAGES) (D5)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003l "
472		"    Cuba Feels Generational and Economic Strains at Sunset of Castro Era  By Maria Abi-Habib and Ed Augustin  1,670 words 19 April 2021   9     Raúl Castro is preparing to step down as head of Cuba's Communist Party, leaving Cubans without a Castro to lead them for the first time in over 60 years.  When Raúl Castro announced last week that he was preparing to retire as Cuba's top leader, he had a warning for a nation increasingly divided over the legacy of its Communist revolution: The choice at hand is continuity of the revolution's ideals, or defeat.  Since 1959, when Raúl and his older brother, Fidel, led an insurgency against an American-backed dictator to victory, Cuba has been led by a Castro. Now, as Raúl -- who is 89 and succeeded his older brother -- steps down from the helm of the Communist Party, he leaves a country that is torn by the most brutal economic crisis in decades.  There is also a deep generational rift.  Many older Cubans remember the poverty and inequality they faced before the Castros, and remain loyal to the revolution despite decades of hardship. But younger generations, who grew up with the achievements of socialism, including access to education and health care, chafe at its limits. They are demanding less government control and more economic freedom.  ''There is a very sharp generational divide,'' said William LeoGrande, an expert on Cuba affairs and a professor at the American University. ''And that's one of the Cuban government's principal challenges going forward, because their historic base of support is gradually retiring and dying off.''  Mr. Castro announced he was relinquishing the nation's most powerful position -- first secretary of the Communist Party -- on Friday, at the opening of the party's four-day congress, held this year under the banner of ''Unity and Continuity.''  The man expected to become the next head of the Communist Party is Cuba's current president, Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez, who turns 61 later this month. A party stalwart, Mr. Díaz-Canel is part of a younger generation that wants a gradual opening of the country, though no change to Cuba's system of one-party rule.  The party conference, which happens every five years, was stagegd to underscore the endurance of revolutionary ideals in Cuba. But the transition comes at what may be a tipping point for the island.  Over the past few years, as the Trump administration imposed stringent sanctions on Cuba and the tourism industry was decimated by the pandemic, Cubans have seen their country's economy plummet once again, with many waiting for hours in bread lines. The country's lauded health care system is frayed. And the number of Cubans trying to leave the island is going up, though it is still far from the exoduses of the 1980s and 1990s.  ''The Communist Party lives off the achievements of a long time ago, from when they began,'' said Claudia Genlui, an activist with the San Isidro political movement, a collective of artists who have protested against the Communist Party in recent months. Although the group is small, it has surprised the nation with its continued defiance.  ''The party does not represent my generation, it does not represent me,'' Ms. Genlui said, adding that ''there is a lack of generational connection, of interests, of priorities, and all of that somehow drives us away.''  Mr. Castro, to some extent, would agree.  Although Fidel held fast to his rallying cry of ''socialism or death'' until he died in 2016, the younger Mr. Castro grew to realize that reform was necessary to quell growing discontent and began opening up the country's economy.  After Fidel formally resigned from the presidency in 2008, Raúl Castro prioritized recruiting younger Cubans into the Communist Party and putting younger members into top government positions.  That has sat well with some Cubans.  ''I think we've got to move on to a new generation, younger people with new ideas,'' said Osvaldo Reyes, 55, a taxi driver in Havana, while voicing his support for Mr. Castro and the Communist Party. ''A revolution should keep transforming, keep doing the best for people.''  When the Castro brothers started their popular uprising, they tapped into a deep well of discontent many Cubans had over their country's corrupt ruling elite, which was not just out of touch but also unconcerned by the dire living conditions of most Cubans.  The brothers led a scrappy insurgency against the country's dictator, Fulgencio Batista, and Cuba became a bulwark against decades of American intervention in Latin America.  But decades later, it would be the Castro brothers and their Communist Party that would be criticized by ordinary Cubans as out of touch. When Raúl Castro took over as head of the Communist Party in 2011, he was surrounded by a government stacked with octogenarian generals.  While many Cubans are fiercely proud of their nation's sovereignty, they have tired of watching the same revolution-era generals control nearly every aspect of their lives, from how much they earn to the food they eat.  ''Lots of people still don't feel represented because he didn't manage to breach the gap between the government and the people,'' Adilen Sardiñas, 28, said of Raúl Castro.  While Ms. Sardiñas expressed frustration with the slow pace of reforms, like many interviewed, she also blamed America for a decades-long embargo that has crippled Cuba's economy and further embittered Cubans against the United States.  ''We need a change, but I don't know if we'll be able to because we've got our neighbor, the U.S., stepping on our heels and closing doors everywhere,'' she said.  Even among older Cubans who still support the Communist Party, many agree it is inaccessible, ruling from a perch.  ''It is impossible to continue a socialist policy without having any interaction with citizens,'' said Rafael Hernandez, the editor of Temas Magazine, a quasi-independent Cuban publication linked to the state. ''They need to democratize the political system and the base of the Communist Party.''  Reform has proceeded at a glacial pace, slowed by a bureaucracy worried about losing its privileges and by the revolution's old guard, suspicious of any change that might nudge Cuba closer to capitalism.  Carlos Alzugaray, a former Cuban ambassador and a Communist Party member, described the current struggle as generational.  ''Raúl used to say our worst enemy is the old mentality, and that's what I think is happening: that the old leaders don't want to change,'' said Mr. Alzugaray. ''Raúl wants change, and the younger leaders want change but are worried that they will be criticized for not being truthful to the revolution of Fidel Castro.''  The problem, as the country's prime minister, Manuel Marrero, said earlier this month when speaking about the urgency to make reforms, is that ''people do not eat plans.''  Details about Cuba's future were left unaddressed at this year's congress. Instead, Mr. Castro's opening speech started with a history lesson.  ''As long as imperialism exists, the party, the state and the people will pay maximum attention to the defense services,'' Mr. Castro said, referring to the United States. ''History teaches, too eloquently, that those who forget this principle do not survive error.''  Hanging over the congress was the recent change of leadership in the United States and what prospects or challenges the new administration of President Biden may hold for Cuba.  As vice president during the Obama administration, Mr. Biden helped normalize Cuban-American relations, allowing remittances to flow and lifting travel restrictions. Those policies were reversed once President Donald J. Trump took office, and what economic gains Cuba made were swiftly wiped away.  During his presidential campaign, Mr. Biden promised to thaw relations with Cuba once more. But the Biden administration cooled to the idea after Democrats fared worse than expected in Florida, with Cuban-Americans supporting Mr. Trump and his hawkish foreign policy.  Earlier this month, Juan Gonzalez, a senior National Security Council director, said Cuba was not a foreign policy priority for the Biden administration.  Mr. Castro is likely to retain some influence even in retirement, but he is leaving the day-to-day ruling of Cuba to President Díaz-Canel. When Mr. Castro stepped down in 2018 as president -- the country's second-most powerful position -- he handed the job over to Mr. Díaz-Canel.  A former bodyguard for Mr. Castro and a technocrat, Mr. Díaz-Canel allowed Cubans to access the internet from their phones in 2018, and in their homes the following year -- changes many feel helped fuel protests and demands for greater political freedom.  In January, he further opened up the country to private enterprise, expanding the types of businesses Cubans could enter.  But Cuban leaders are proceeding cautiously.  ''The government is deathly afraid of change it is not in control of, because it would threaten their economic and political position,'' said Ted Henken a professor at Baruch College in New York and author of ''Cuba's Digital Revolution.''  ''It is afraid of any change that it is not choreographing and in control of, and that doesn't come from the top down -- which is ironic for what began as a popular revolution that was massively supported by the people.''  Above, a ceremony in memory of Fidel Castro in Santiago de Cuba in 2016, the year he died. Left, Mr. Castro speaking to reporters in 1964 in a car with a submachine gun in the seat pocket. Below left, Mr. Castro, center, in 1958 with his command staff, including his brother Raúl, kneeling, and Che Guevara, second from left. Below right, Fidel and Raúl Castro in 2003. Raúl Castro, now 89, announced on Friday that he was relinquishing the nation's most powerful position: first secretary of the Communist Party. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE new_york_times; JACK MANNING/THE new_york_times; ULLSTEIN BILD, VIA GETTY IMAGES; ADALBERTO ROQUE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003i "
473		"   CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  He Hasn't Conducted Much Opera. That's OK.  By Anthony Tommasini  1,413 words 19 April 2021   3     This classical superstar, just named as the Paris Opera's next music director, isn't the first maestro to jump to the theater.  The conductor Gustavo Dudamel has accomplished so much in his blazing career that it's easy to forget he's only 40. The music world has wondered for a while what his future would hold beyond the Los Angeles Philharmonic, a hotbed of adventurousness where he has been the musical leader since 2009. Major orchestras around the world have pursued him. Anything seemed possible.  Still, the announcement on Friday that he will be the next music director of the Paris Opera was somewhat surprising. Snagging this superstar for a six-year appointment, which roughly overlaps with Dudamel's current contract in Los Angeles, is being touted as a coup for the 352-year-old company, which, like classical music institutions everywhere, is grappling with issues of relevance and diversity. Dudamel will bring dynamic musicianship and charisma to this influential post. Hopefully he will make the company a more welcoming home for new and recent operas.  Yet the elephant in the room is that he really isn't known for conducting opera. He has only appeared at the Paris Opera once, with ''La Bohème'' in 2017. It's true, he has led works at major houses in Milan, Vienna and Berlin, and in Los Angeles he has done standard and more offbeat repertory at both Walt Disney Concert Hall and the Hollywood Bowl. He made his Metropolitan Opera conducting debut in 2018 with Verdi's ''Otello,'' a performance that, if not revelatory, was seething and sensitive.  But almost all his renown has come from his exhilarating performances with symphony orchestras. Does lacking operatic experience matter in landing an important opera post?  Historically, European opera houses were the traditional training grounds for young conductors of all kinds. Before being entrusted with leading performances, aspiring conductors would start off coaching singers at the piano, rehearsing the chorus and assisting senior conductors. (This was the path taken by Dudamel's predecessor in Paris, Philippe Jordan, 46, who has moved to the Vienna State Opera.)  Direct work with singers was, and remains, crucial. If all instrumentalists to some degree imitate the human voice, conductors in opera gain a special feeling for the art of shaping a long lyrical line: They learn to breathe with singers, to anticipate the melodic pace and flow of fine vocalists. Yet they must also guide, and almost rein in, those singers, lest their lines slacken with too much expression. This sensitivity develops with long practice. Opera also compels young conductors to hone their skills as musical traffic cops, coordinating singers and choristers (often spread far apart onstage) and the players in the pit.  The traditional path of learning the conducting profession through opera was exemplified by Gustav Mahler, who in his youth worked in opera houses in Prague, Leipzig and Hamburg, then rose to become the director of the Vienna State Opera and, briefly, a principal conductor at the Met. During this period, he also led major orchestras, including the New York Philharmonic from 1909 until his death in 1911. Even if he was best known for his visionary symphonies and never wrote an opera, Mahler did most of his conducting in opera houses.  Toscanini spent the first half of his long career immersed in opera, working tirelessly in Italian houses. By today's standards he would be considered a new-music specialist, since he led many premieres, including ''La Bohème'' in 1896, the year he conducted his first symphonic concert. In 1898 he became the principal conductor of the Teatro alla Scala in Milan, and left to take the chief position at the Met in 1908 before returning to La Scala. Then, in 1928, he became the music director of the New York Philharmonic, and never ran another opera house. In 1937 NBC created the NBC Symphony, an orchestra of top-rank players, for him, and its broadcasts gained a huge following (including for an influential series of opera performances).  George Szell is so well known for his long tenure as music director of the Cleveland Orchestra (1946-70) that it's sometimes forgotten that he spent a great deal of his early professional life in opera. This includes what became the Berlin State Opera, where the young Szell was mentored by Richard Strauss; Szell eventually become principal conductor there. During the 1940s, Szell conducted regularly at the Met, including two acclaimed ''Ring'' cycles. Then, in 1950, Rudolf Bing, who disliked Szell, took charge at the company, and Szell's last performance there was in 1954. No matter: He was by then ensconced in Cleveland and never looked back.  For many opera fans, Leonard Bernstein was the one who got away. He clearly had a flair for drama, though early on he channeled that energy into his Broadway scores. Even during his college days, Bernstein was groomed for the podium by Dimitri Mitropoulos, an important mentor. And after Bernstein made his sensational, last-minute debut with the New York Philharmonic at 25, his destiny seemed set in the symphonic world.  Now and then he worked in opera. His 1964 Met debut with Verdi's ''Falstaff'' was a scintillating performance, and in 1972 there he presented a boldly reimagined, gravely compelling -- some critics said ponderously slow -- take on ''Carmen.'' In Vienna he had tremendous success with ''Der Rosenkavalier'' and ''Fidelio.'' But he mostly whipped up music drama in the concert hall leading major orchestras in symphonic works.  Many leading conductors have balanced work between opera houses and symphony orchestras, readily transferring techniques and styles between the two genres and repertories.  Georg Solti had storied tenures as music director at the Royal Opera in London and, for 22 momentous years, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra; Daniel Barenboim spent time at the helm of the Orchestre de Paris, the Chicago Symphony, La Scala and, since 1992, the Berlin State Opera. Riccardo Muti, formerly a driving force at La Scala, also served as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra and continues to thrive now at the Chicago Symphony. Yannick Nézet-Séguin, the Met's current music director, is also director of the Philadelphia Orchestra; he worked at the Opéra de Montréal early in his career.  Dudamel is not the only conductor to win a major post in opera without extensive experience in the field. After 29 seasons leading the Boston Symphony Orchestra, Seiji Ozawa became the principal conductor at the Vienna State Opera in 2002. He had some significant opera credits, including leading the premiere of Messiaen's ''Saint François d'Assise'' at the Paris Opera in 1983, but was hardly famed for his theatrical work. Even James Levine, who was among the major conductors of our time most closely associated with opera, was not broadly experienced in the repertory -- and hadn't come up through an opera company's ranks -- when he rose quickly at the Met in the 1970s.  As Bernstein did, Dudamel instinctively conveys the drama of everything he conducts. In works like John Adams's teeming opera-oratorio ''The Gospel According to the Other Mary,'' he has demonstrated skill at handling sprawling vocal, choral and instrumental forces and bringing shape to a long, teeming score.  But does he have a feeling for, say, classic Verdian style? Can he coax an orchestra to support a singer in a deceptively simple aria with a bare oompah accompaniment?  He may well end up displaying a gift for all of this. And even if not, the Paris Opera can bring in more experienced hands to handle such works while Dudamel focuses on his strengths. He can be a charismatic face for the company's outreach to new audiences while advancing a compelling, contemporary artistic vision.  Plus, let's not forget that he's a terrifically exciting conductor. And a good relationship between a maestro and a company can transcend a nontraditional path to the podium. During his 2017 ''Bohème'' in Paris, Dudamel recalled recently, he felt an immediate connection to the house.  ''I was here one month and a half,'' he said, ''and I was feeling like I was at home.'' That's the most promising sign there could be.  Gustavo Dudamel, the Los Angeles Philharmonic's conductor, will be the next music director of the Paris Opera. (PHOTOGRAPH BY VINCENT TULLO FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003u "
474		"    CBS News Hits Reset Yet Again  By Michael M. Grynbaum and John Koblin  1,237 words 19 April 2021   1     In an interview as she prepares to step down as news division head, Susan Zirinsky said, ''I feel I have given my entire soul into rebuilding this organization.''  In May 2020, a few months after ''CBS Evening News'' relocated from its longtime Manhattan home to Washington -- a move that perplexed some producers and cost millions -- the third-ranked newscast finally seemed to be finding a groove.  Susan Zirinsky, a CBS News legend who became its president in 2019 after nearly a half-century at the network, had picked Norah O'Donnell to lead the ''Evening News,'' and the anchor had landed a big interview with Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg.  At 6:30 p.m., viewers on the East Coast tuned in -- but Ms. O'Donnell was nowhere in sight. A technical glitch had knocked out CBS's transmission feed. With homebound staff hobbled by the pandemic, the network tried, and failed, to restore its flagship newscast; instead, viewers saw an awkward ad break and content from the CBSN streaming channel. On Instagram, Ms. O'Donnell posted a video apologizing.  It was among the tougher moments of Ms. Zirinsky's time at the CBS News helm, a tenure that began with promises of rebirth under the first woman to lead the network's news division and ended, on Thursday, with an announcement that she was stepping down after just two years for a behind-the-scenes production role.  Ms. Zirinsky, 69, is a singular figure at CBS News, the rare woman to climb the ranks of network news -- she was the inspiration for Holly Hunter's character in the 1987 film ''Broadcast News'' -- and her ascension to president in 2019 was literally met with cheers from the staff. She took over a news division reeling from damaging harassment scandals, including the tarnished exits of Jeff Fager, the longtime executive producer of ''60 Minutes,'' and Leslie Moonves, the former CBS chief executive.  ''The morale was at an all-time low, the shows were messy,'' Ms. Zirinsky said in an interview on Saturday, shortly after she had finished overseeing live coverage of Prince Philip's funeral. ''What I feel like I've achieved in these two years is something that for me, philosophically, journalistically, feels like I righted the ship.''  ''I feel I have given my entire soul into rebuilding this organization,'' she said.  Ms. Zirinsky is also leaving the network's morning and evening news shows as she had inherited them: in third place, behind ABC and NBC. And she will be succeeded by a pair of outsiders more steeped in business strategy than news reporting: Neeraj Khemlani, a veteran executive at the publisher Hearst, and Wendy McMahon, the former head of ABC's local stations group.  The change is a strategic pivot by George Cheeks, the executive who took responsibility of CBS's television properties last year and is now charged with shaking up a news division that is long on history, but short on viewers. CBS News may be the former home of Edward Murrow and Walter Cronkite -- its Manhattan studios are filled with relics from midcentury halcyon days -- but it has struggled for years to compete against ABC and NBC.  Mr. Cheeks had lamented at times that Ms. Zirinsky -- or ''Z,'' in CBS parlance -- could be overly focused on the minutiae of news gathering, rather than broader changes in the news business, according to a person who requested anonymity to speak candidly about private discussions.  ''The wants and habits of our consumers evolve by the day,'' Mr. Cheeks wrote to his staff in a memo last week. He effusively praised Ms. Zirinsky as an ''indefatigable'' driver of ''powerful journalism'' while suggesting that it would fall to the next generation of CBS leaders to usher in the modern era: ''Z has helped position the division for success.''  Ms. Zirinsky, in the interview, said that ''every part of my being believes this transition is right, at the right time, with the right ideas.'' She conceded she ''would be lying'' if she claimed ratings were unimportant, but she noted that ''Evening News'' had narrowed its deficit in the key demographic and that she had shored up a newsroom that, after the convulsions of recent years, had ''felt a bit abandoned.''  Ms. Zirinsky signed the star anchor Gayle King to a new contract at ''CBS This Morning,'' which had lost momentum after the exit of its former co-anchor Charlie Rose over claims of workplace misconduct. On March 8, the show beat ABC and NBC for the first time on the strength of its exclusive excerpts from Oprah Winfrey's CBS interview with Meghan Markle. ''60 Minutes'' and ''CBS Sunday Morning'' remained highly respected and highly rated.  Some of Ms. Zirinsky's strengths -- a love of producing; an encyclopedic knowledge of the network -- proved double-edged. Accustomed to the banter of the control room, she sometimes mused aloud about personnel changes, prompting unease and unauthorized leaks; trained to report every fact, she spent months seeking input about her next moves, delaying big decisions.  By the time Ms. O'Donnell was officially named ''Evening News'' anchor in May 2019 -- days after the announcement had leaked to The New York Post -- Ms. Zirinsky had openly told colleagues that the network presidency could be an awkward fit for her. The Post reported last week that Ms. Zirinsky, during a lengthy corporate budget meeting, scrawled ''I hate my job'' on a sheet of paper and held it up.  ''I am transparent,'' Ms. Zirinsky said, when asked about her expressions of frustration with the job. ''The passion that I feel sometimes gets misinterpreted. I wouldn't have traded this for anything. If I was asked today to step into this role, I would do it all over again.''  CBS News has tried a number of approaches over the years to lift its fortunes.  The ''Evening News'' tried a megawatt star (Katie Couric) and a lesser-known homegrown prospect (Jeff Glor). ''CBS This Morning'' was a revolving door of anchors and producers. David Rhodes, who had worked at Fox News before he became the CBS News president in 2011, ran the division in the style of a technocrat before he was replaced by Ms. Zirinsky, the old-school shoe leather journalist.  CBS executives said relocating the ''Evening News'' to Washington included an overdue upgrade for the network's facilities in the capital. Election years typically attract big audiences, though CBS's coverage of the 2020 presidential debates ranked behind the major cable news networks and ABC and NBC in total viewers.  The incoming leaders, Mr. Khemlani and Ms. McMahon, start in May. Mr. Khemlani has experience in Hearst's newspaper and television business and worked at CBS as a ''60 Minutes'' producer from 1998 to 2006. Ms. McMahon worked at CBS-owned stations in Boston and Minneapolis before her years at ABC.  Ms. Zirinsky is in discussions about a significant new production role at CBS. In the interview, she acknowledged the TV news business ''is pushing in a different direction.''  ''This is setting us up for the future,'' she said, adding, ''I don't look in the rear view mirror. I look forward.''  Susan Zirinsky lasted two years as head of the news division at CBS News. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE new_york_times) (B3)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003h "
475		"    My Second Phase of Adulthood  By Charles M. Blow  924 words 19 April 2021   20     How I'm changing my perspective on life.  This weekend I attended my second funeral in about six months. The first was my oldest brother's. The second was for the mother of a college friend. Neither death was caused by the pandemic, but took place during it.  As I departed to Georgia from Louisiana, as the plane cut a path through the clouds and came to a cruise above them, it occurred to me that I was now fully entrenched in the second phase of adulthood.  It is that time of life when children begin to graduate from high school or college and leave home. My own children have now all graduated from college, although the oldest is now in medical school. They are grown-up now, apart from me, making their own lives and their own decisions, and I now have to forge a different relationship with them, an adult one.  This idea of developing a friendship with your children is foreign, exhilarating and absolutely necessary. It is a form of releasing them to keep them, of elevating them and respecting them.  It is that time of life when some people's first marriages die or new marriages are born. I officiated the second marriage of one of my best friends last year. It symbolized to me that rebirth is possible, that starting over is feasible, that not giving up on love is essential.  But this time of life is also the time when parents -- yours and those of your friends and relatives -- grow older and slower, get sicker and begin to pass away. At the funeral of my friend's mother this weekend, he told me that the mother of another of our college friends died a few days ago.  One of my oldest friends is dealing with a father on the decline, in a nursing home, and suffering through escalating phases of dementia. Last year one of my best friends lost his mother.  This seemingly sudden intrusion of death into your life changes you. At least it is changing me. It reminds me that life is terribly fragile and short, that we are all just passing through this plane, ever so briefly. And that has impressed upon me how important it is to live boldly, bravely and openly, to embrace every part of me and celebrate it, to say and write the important things: the truth and my truth.  I realize that, according to the odds, my life is nearly two-thirds over, that I have more summers behind me than in front of me. This doesn't mean that I've grown fatalistic or even that I feel particularly old. It is just a realization that the math says what the math says. And as such, I have begun to make certain adjustments, to change my perspective on my life.  I have started to manage my regrets and to reduce them, to forgive myself for foolish mistakes and reckless choices, to remember that we are all just human beings stumbling through this life, trying to figure it out, falling down and getting back up along the way. I have learned to cut myself some slack and get on with being a better person.  I must say that the pandemic may also be contributing to all this. I have fundamentally changed during it, been changed by it, like many others I suppose. After I got over the initial shock of it feeling like the world as I knew it was coming to an end, I became incredibly introspective, and I didn't like some of what I saw. So, I changed it.  I decided to be healthier, physically, mentally and spiritually, and I decided that I needed to make my mark on the world, the biggest, boldest mark I was destined to make, while I still had time and energy, but also to be thankful for the road my life had already taken.  I always remember that I'm a poor kid from a tiny town in the American South. I remember the summer when I didn't wear shoes, the Saturday afternoon trips to the junkyard to scavenge for toys other children had thrown away, the house with the leaky windows through which you could hear the wind howl.  As the performer Dorian Corey expounded in the documentary ''Paris Is Burning'':  ''I always had hopes of being a big star. But as you get older, you aim a little lower. Everybody wants to make an impression, some mark upon the world. Then you think, you've made a mark on the world if you just get through it, and a few people remember your name. Then you've left a mark. You don't have to bend the whole world. I think it's better to just enjoy it.''  I also decided to just enjoy it. I have decided to be more intentional about managing and maintaining personal relationships, to watering those flowers.  When I am gone, and people remember my name, I want some of them to smile.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Moazzam Ali Brohi/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003g "
476		"    Amid Cold War, A Cultural Shift  By Marc Tracy  1,486 words 19 April 2021   6     Louis Menand's new book about art and thought in the postwar years features a very large cast, including George Orwell, James Baldwin, Susan Sontag and the Beatles.  In the spring of 1999, Louis Menand taught a class called ''Art and Thought of the 1960s'' at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. He assigned Malcolm X, Joan Didion, ''Portnoy's Complaint.'' Toward the end of the semester, he told his students he was thinking of writing a book about the '60s.  Maybe he shouldn't, they told him.  ''So you can make a painting of a soup can -- that's not such a big deal,'' Menand said, characterizing his students' response. Sixties culture, he recognized, was a close ancestor of the culture of the day. ''I realized,'' he added, ''that what they were really interested in was the '50s, which they didn't understand as well.''  Menand took his students' note. The result, ''The Free World: Art and Thought in the Cold War,'' will be published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux on Tuesday. The book seeks to explain not the '60s scene (though Andy Warhol, soup cans and all, does appear), but how the ground was prepared for it by the West's most influential thinkers, authors and artists between 1945 and 1965.  ''This book is the back story to contemporary American culture,'' said Menand, 69, in a video interview earlier this month from Cambridge, Mass., where he is a professor at Harvard. ''It's about the emergence of an American culture that became central in world affairs.''  He began work on it around 2011, nearly a decade after his last large history book, the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''The Metaphysical Club,'' was published. He credited an office in the stacks at Harvard's Widener Library -- he secured it after 10 years on the waiting list; you can find him next to the Slavic periodicals -- for helping him complete a book spanning more than 700 pages, not including endnotes.  While Menand, who goes by ''Luke,'' rejects the notion that his book tells the story of the baby boomers -- ''It's 75 million people,'' he said, ''so they're not all in 'Doonesbury''' -- writing ''The Free World,'' he conceded, meant writing about his own world.  ''As you have probably guessed, this is the period I grew up in,'' he writes in the preface. The book, he says, ''was a way of filling in the blanks in my own story.''  Readers of ''The Metaphysical Club'' or Menand's critical essays in The New Yorker, where he is a staff writer, will recognize the elegant, even-keeled prose in ''The Free World.'' He aspires to take readers by the hand and walk them through complex abstractions.  ''The Free World'' is more of a survey than ''The Metaphysical Club,'' which told an ambitious but contained story focused on four American thinkers of the philosophical school known as Pragmatism. Many major figures get the better parts of their own chapters in ''The Free World'': Hannah Arendt, George Orwell, Isaiah Berlin, James Baldwin. French intellectuals play significant roles, with sections on Jean-Paul Sartre, the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss and the film theorist André Bazin. The artists Menand spotlights are reminiscent of the roll call offered by the bohemians in the musical ''Rent'': ''Ginsberg, Dylan, Cunningham and Cage'' (Menand's pop-music chapter focuses on the Beatles).  ''The Free World'' does have a through line, gestured at by its title. Thinkers like Arendt and Sartre looked around the postwar landscape and concluded that freedom would be the era's byword. And while they were certainly interested in political liberty, Menand in his telling focuses primarily on the era's distinctive legacy of thinking about a freedom associated with self-knowledge. (Maggie Nelson, the author of ''The Argonauts,'' said that ''On Freedom,'' her book due out later this year, was partly inspired by Menand's seminar in 1999, in which she was a student.)  ''When you understand more clearly, in a demystified way, what your situation is, you have some agency, you have some freedom,'' Menand said. ''To me, that's the right line to take.''  The quest for this kind of freedom recurs throughout the book -- in the deconstructionism of Jacques Derrida, the anticolonial politics of Aimé Césaire, the feminism of Betty Friedan -- before running aground in the tragic final chapter, which profiles the New Left activist Tom Hayden, a student of European existentialism, and closes with the American involvement in Vietnam and Western intellectuals' reckoning with the question of whose interests their talk of freedom had served.  ''It didn't all turn out the way we hoped it would turn out, and Vietnam became a communist totalitarian state,'' Menand said (''part of me thinks I should write a book about Vietnam,'' he added).  Menand relentlessly grounds his analysis in a larger context. In his telling, Arendt's bleak view of European civilization arose from her repeated displacement as a German-born Jew. ''Bonnie and Clyde'' could be made in Hollywood in the '60s not only because of the influence of the French New Wave but because of the lapsing of a rule that had banned movies from showing a gun firing and the bullet hitting its target in the same shot.  Amanda Claybaugh, a close colleague of Menand's in Harvard's English department before she became the school's dean of undergraduate education, said that embedding ideas in stories is an ''analytical mode'' for Menand. ''If you tell a story, you have to think in very concrete and specific terms about how culture works in a particular moment, how certain ideas, influences, encounters shape a person.''  How was Menand shaped?  He grew up in the Boston area, where his father was an administrator at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His great-grandfather, also Louis Menand (the author is technically Louis Menand IV), was a French horticulturalist with a successful flower business in upstate New York. Today, a village hugging the Hudson River just north of Albany is called Menands, after the author's ancestor.  Menand left the East Coast for the only extended period of his life to attend Pomona College in Claremont, Calif., where he wrote poetry and ate meals under a large mural, ''Prometheus,'' by the Mexican artist José Clemente Orozco, which appears in ''The Free World'' as inspiration to Jackson Pollock. After a year of law school, Menand studied English at Columbia, earning a doctorate in 1980. He taught at Princeton before arriving at CUNY Grad Center in 1988, and landed at Harvard in 2003. He contributed to The New Republic and The New York Review of Books before becoming a staff writer at The New Yorker in 2001.  It is a life story that would not be out of place in, well, ''Doonesbury.'' But the boomers -- who started being born in 1946 -- were not really the '60s generation, Menand said. Hayden and Mario Savio, the student activists of his final chapter, were born in 1939 and 1942, respectively. Menand, who is in the older half of his generational cohort, turned 18 in 1970.  Menand knew several of his book's figures personally, such as Susan Sontag, who died in 2004. But his relationship to its events might best be exemplified by the literary critic Lionel Trilling. Menand went to Columbia in 1974 to study under Trilling and his acolytes, but ended up taking just one class with Trilling -- a seminar on the poet William Wordsworth -- before he died in 1975.  Menand's timing might in others be a recipe for blinding nostalgia, even resentment. But he appears untroubled by the thought that he came too late.  He was compelled as a young man to contribute to the New York-centered ''little magazines,'' as Trilling and Sontag had; his byline appeared in Partisan Review and Dissent. But his goal even then was to appear in The New Yorker and Esquire, and these days he does not consider himself, he said, ''to be writing in, or as an heir to, some sort of New York intellectual tradition.''  The little magazines were rife with intellectual disputation -- ''The Free World'' covers an argument about Black literature that took place in their pages between the novelist Ralph Ellison and the editor Irving Howe in 1963 and '64. Menand is the writer who explains such bouts, rather than one of the pugilists.  ''I want everybody to agree with me,'' he said, with a touch of self-deprecation. ''I want to put things so perfectly that no one can disagree.''  Louis Menand at his home in Cambridge, Mass. Writing his new book, ''The Free World: Art and Thought in the Cold War,'' was, in part, ''a way of filling in the blanks in my own story,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY LUONG FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003p "
477		"    Called Back Up to the Majors, 12 Years Later  By James Wagner  1,097 words 19 April 2021   5     Sean Kazmar Jr., who pinch-hit for Atlanta on Saturday, had been in the minors since a brief call-up in 2008.  During the Atlanta Braves' 13-4 loss to the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field on Saturday, infielder Sean Kazmar Jr. entered the game in the fifth inning as a pinch-hitter, saw four pitches and grounded into a double play. The three-minute appearance may not seem like much, but it meant the world to Kazmar and his family. It was Kazmar's first major league game since Sept. 23, 2008 -- a span of 4,589 days.  ''Definitely everything and then some,'' said a beaming Kazmar after the game. ''What an amazing feeling.''  Kazmar's story is one of relentlessness and optimism, and, as Braves Manager Brian Snitker said, perhaps befitting of a movie or book. Kazmar first accomplished his dream, at 24, in 2008, getting called up by the Padres to serve as a fill-in for the injured shortstop Khalil Greene. He played in 19 games, starting in 11, and hitting .205.  Like any professional baseball player, Kazmar hoped to stay there. But instead, in 2009, he was back in the minors, where the travel and pay are a far cry from the charter planes and millionaires of the big leagues. He spent two seasons with the Padres' Class AAA team. He was with the Seattle Mariners' AAA team in 2011, was in the Mets' system and joined Atlanta's AAA team in Gwinnett in 2013.  In all, Kazmar played 1,106 minor league games between his major league appearances. Throughout that time, he heard comparisons to Crash Davis, the player who served as inspiration for the main character in the movie ''Bull Durham.'' But even as Kazmar was stuck in the minors, he said that month and a half in the majors were the greatest days of his life and part of why he was still going into his 30s.  ''There could have been obvious times where I doubted that this opportunity would ever come,'' he said on Saturday. ''But honestly, it never really left my mind and especially the last few years, I still felt like I had the ability to play at this level.''  In 2019, after re-signing a minor league deal with Atlanta, Kazmar, at 34, had one of his best seasons, hitting .270 with 12 home runs and 61 runs batted in while playing all around the infield.  Then the coronavirus pandemic struck in 2020. Kazmar said he couldn't look for a job outside baseball because he was unsure whether he would end up on an expanded major league roster, so he began receiving unemployment insurance like so many minor league players. (The minor league season was canceled.) Instead of playing, Kazmar was with his wife and two young boys at their home in Arizona -- time he wouldn't have otherwise had while chasing his dream.  ''I know it drove him nuts last year not being in the holy ground, and he probably was the M.V.P. of spring training for like the third year in a row,'' said Snitker, who managed Kazmar for several years in AAA.  But when Atlanta suffered a series of injuries on Friday -- second baseman Ozzie Albies was hit in the leg by a pitch and outfielder Ender Inciarte exited with a hamstring strain -- Kazmar finally had a path back to the major leagues. Kazmar, who was on Atlanta's pandemic reserve roster, said he was at his hotel room watching the Braves play and he received a phone call a few hours after the game.  ''That was probably one of the greatest moments I've had as a manager at all the levels, quite honestly,'' Snitker said.  When Snitker was promoted from the Braves' AAA team to be their major league manager during the 2016 season, he said that one of the greatest things that could happen to him was to have Kazmar alongside him. Although Snitker said he wasn't sure how long Kazmar would be needed on the big-league club, he was thrilled that their goal came true on Saturday.  The last player with a longer gap between major league games, according to the Elias Sports Bureau, was Ralph Winegarner, who went 13 years 14 days between pitching appearances for Cleveland in 1936 and the St. Louis Browns in 1949.  ''It was worth the wait, for sure, to get back and get in there to get another,'' Kazmar said of his lone at-bat on Saturday.  Although Kazmar said it felt like time had flown by, he was fuzzy on some of his own history. Asked on Saturday if he remembered the previous time he played in the majors, Kazmar confused it for the preceding game. ''That's how long it's been,'' he conceded with a laugh.  Only one other player from Kazmar's previous big-league appearance is still in the majors: Wade LeBlanc, 36, who started for the Padres that day and is now a member of the Baltimore Orioles' bullpen. The starters for the opposing Los Angeles Dodgers that day included Manny Ramirez and Nomar Garciaparra.  ''You go from '08 to '21 in between, you got to be kidding me,'' Snitker said of Kazmar. ''To have the perseverance and the dedication and the drive -- and he's getting better as a player.''  Although playing minor league baseball wasn't particularly lucrative or stable, Kazmar said he was also driven because he had loved baseball since he was 4. He was born a Braves fan in Valdosta, Ga. It was the first jersey he said he ever wore, so donning it in a major league game was particularly special to him.  Kazmar said his wife and his mother dropped everything to get on a red-eye flight on Friday night to make it to Chicago in time to watch his lone at-bat. And during the game, Kazmar said he was nervous and emotional.  ''Obviously I wasn't, when I first started this career, trying to play in Triple-A my whole career,'' he said. ''That's just kind of how it ended up. But at the same time, I'd do it all over again for a day like today.''  Sean Kazmar Jr., left in 2008, played 1,106 minor league games before his return on Saturday, above. ''It was worth the wait, for sure,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PAUL BEATY/ASSOCIATED PRESS; JONATHAN MOORE/GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003q "
478		"   THE MEDIA EQUATION  Ads, Once Left for Dead, Make a Comeback in the Roaring Twenties  By Ben Smith  1,217 words 19 April 2021   1     Subscriptions may be the rage, but businesses of all sorts are pouring money into advertising -- digital most of all.  If you wanted to sound smart at a media business conference or sell your start-up over the last couple of years, you'd talk about the rise of digital subscriptions. Netflix and Spotify led the way in getting consumers to pay every month for their content, and The new_york_times, The Washington Post and many others followed. By last week, everyone was hawking media subscriptions, from the owners of the SpongeBob SquarePants TV show ($5.99 a month) to the staid newswire Reuters ($35) to my friend Isaac who wanders aimlessly around New York ($7).  The astonishing rise of subscription digital media is part of a broader rush toward the reliable, direct-to-consumer economics that has captivated investors. You can now subscribe to huge hits like Disney+ and Peloton as well as niche ventures like high-end dog food and beans.  Digital media executives scrambled last year to tell their boards about their new subscription products, but something strange happened: Their old, unfashionable advertising businesses exploded as consumers stayed home and shopped online. And now, travel companies, liquor companies and basically everyone else hoping to capitalize on a wide open summer and the marketing dream of a post-pandemic Roaring Twenties economic boom have begun pouring money into advertising on virtually every platform, but digital media most of all.  ''Ad spending is red-hot right now,'' says Henry Blodget, a co-founder of Business Insider, which was early to introduce a subscription tier in 2017. ''The economy is cranking up, travel and leisure are coming back, and consumers are emerging from their pandemic cocoons.''  Several privately held publishers said their first-quarter ad revenue was up strikingly over the same quarter last year, which was the last one largely unscathed by the pandemic: Business Insider by more than 30 percent; Bloomberg Media was up 29 percent; Vice, 25 percent; Bustle Digital Group, more than 25 percent; and Axios's quarterly ad revenue nearly doubled, executives at those companies told me.  Public companies' first-quarter figures aren't available yet, but a report by the agency GroupM last month showed that advertising in digital media grew by more than 7 percent in 2020, even as television advertising declined and print collapsed during the pandemic. (The Times lagged those other publishers in digital ad sales growth in 2020, even as its print advertising business dropped sharply during the pandemic. But it made up that ground on subscriptions.) ''Advertisers followed consumers online'' during the crisis, said Sarah Iooss, the head of sales for the Americas at the gaming platform Twitch. The GroupM report projects that digital advertising will grow 22 percent in 2021.  ''The venture capital world spent a decade betting against advertising, and it's about to blow up in their faces,'' predicted Bryan Goldberg, the chief executive of Bustle, which has bought brands including Mic and Nylon, and is planning to restart Gawker.  There are plenty of reasons to be cautious about this revival. One is that, for all the political pressure on Google and Facebook, they continue to be the behemoths of the American advertising market. About 87 percent of last year's growth went to those two companies, according to an estimate that the trade group Digital Content Next did for me, based on figures from the Interactive Advertising Bureau. Facebook alone brought in more than $84 billion in advertising revenue last year.  There have been suggestions that a coming Apple crackdown on how apps can collect data from users, along with growing global regulatory pressure, could slow the juggernauts, but those moves may also damage the business of other media companies who collect user data. The most successful new entrant to the digital advertising market is Amazon, which now devours more than 10 percent of the country's digital advertising business by charging merchants to promote their own products on its marketplace.  One of the legislators who has pushed to rein in the power of the tech giants, Representative David Cicilline, a Democrat from Rhode Island who heads the House Judiciary Committee's antitrust subcommittee, said the improving advertising business would not dampen the appetite in Washington for a crackdown on ''monopoly power'' in Big Tech.  ''These are structural problems in the marketplace, and none of that will be changed by a few strong quarters,'' he said.  The boom in digital advertising is lifting online publishers, but they aren't the biggest beneficiaries. Even as television is getting a smaller share of the advertising market, the most sought-after digital advertising outlets are the new ''connected TV'' platforms -- places like Roku, Hulu and Viacom's Pluto TV. Those platforms put old-fashioned television ads next to old-fashioned television shows, but also provide advertisers detailed data on who is watching.  At the same time, advertisers remain skittish of news, in particular, using key words to block display advertisements from appearing next to stories about polarizing subjects. The president of global news and entertainment at Vice, Jesse Angelo, said he had declined a request last year from an entertainment company that, while celebrating the Black Lives Matter movement on its own website, asked Vice to block its ads from appearing near the terms ''Black,'' ''Black people'' and ''Black Lives Matter.''  The big picture, though, amounts to a kind of optimism unseen in the gloomy digital publishing business for nearly half a decade.  ''I don't know that I could've predicted it at this level,'' said Bloomberg Media Group's chief executive, Justin Smith. ''We haven't seen digital advertising growth in high double digits since maybe 2017.''  And it's not just advertising. Media executives are scrambling to catch up with demand for the other elements of their business that have fallen out of favor as subscriptions ascended, notably events.  ''In the second half of this year, there is just going to be an onslaught of physical events,'' said Chris Weil, the chairman and chief executive of the experiential advertising agency Momentum.  None of this is to say, of course, that media businesses will back away from subscriptions. That's partly because investors continue to value the reliability of that business over the boom and bust of advertising. Advertisers salivate at the idea of inserting commercials into your favorite Netflix shows, but Netflix would never consider it when its stock is riding so high on subscriptions alone.  And paradoxically, one of the forces driving the digital advertising boom is the shift toward subscriptions that was supposed to replace advertising revenue. Selling subscriptions, it turns out, is pretty expensive and the streaming entertainment companies ''need to spend a ton of money on marketing,'' said Matthew Segal, a co-founder of ATTN, a Los Angeles-based media company.  Not all the entrants in the subscription boom will make it, and the notoriously cyclical advertising business will no doubt rise and fall with economic cycles again. For now, though, it has shifted many media companies' calculus, and lifted their moods.  ''It won't last forever,'' Mr. Blodget said. ''But we'll enjoy it while it does.''  Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003f "
479		"    Pushing Against Hate  By Aruna D'Souza  2,124 words 19 April 2021   1     Newly spurred to action to combat bias, they generate subway posters, leverage social media, stage Zoom webinars. ''Our community couldn't take being invisible any longer,'' one artist says.  Early in the pandemic, word started to travel among Asian-American artists: racist attacks were on the rise. Jamie Chan told a fellow artist, Kenneth Tam, about getting kicked out of an Uber pool ride by the driver who noticed her sniffling. Anicka Yi, an artist based in New York, called Christine Y. Kim, a curator at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, to talk about being spit at on a Manhattan street; Kim, in turn, recounted being accosted in a Whole Foods parking lot.  Tam decided to start recording these incidents in a Google spreadsheet he named ''We Are Not COVID.'' It circulated on social media first among arts communities, then to wider audiences. Over the last several months, the document has filled up with reports ranging from microaggressions to outright violence.  ''I had assumed that things like this were going to start happening, but not so quickly, and not to people I knew,'' Tam said in a phone interview. ''It made me realize that I needed to educate myself and perhaps other people about it.''  The rise of racist attacks, some of them horrifyingly lethal, has galvanized Asian-American artists around the country. They are leveraging social media to raise awareness, gathering to protest despite the pandemic precautions, making new work, and -- perhaps above all -- finding new grounds for solidarity with one another and with other affected communities to figure out how to respond to the current climate.  Recent anti-Asian sentiment may have been stoked by Donald Trump's xenophobic response to Covid-19 -- which he repeatedly called ''the Chinese virus.'' But it existed long before him, since the arrival of Chinese workers in the 19th century, and stubbornly persists, even after his departure from office.  The effects of this rhetoric have laid bare the vulnerabilities of a group that comprises five percent of the U.S. population, and is breathtakingly diverse in its makeup, marked by extreme disparities in income, language and culture.  The murders in Atlanta, in which a young white man killed workers and others in Asian-owned massage businesses, highlighted additional complexities of gender and race: of the eight victims, six were Asian-American women, mostly of Korean descent.  An exhibition titled ''Godzilla vs. the Art World: 1990--2001'' that was scheduled to open in May at the Museum of Chinese in America, and a forthcoming anthology edited by the curator Howie Chen about the group Godzilla, a loose affiliation of artists and curators, are timely reminders that activism is not new for Asian- American art workers. They have been organizing for years to increase representation, improve their visibility and forge alliances with other groups.  Godzilla was founded in 1990 in New York City by Ken Chu, Bing Lee, Margo Machida, and others. The group tackled problems associated with being Asian-American in an art world that tended to see race only in terms of Black and white. In the wake of the 1991 Whitney Biennial, it wrote to the museum's director to object to the near-absence of Asian-American artists.  The message had its intended effect: The 1993 biennial included work by several artists of Asian descent, including Byron Kim. His ''Synecdoche,'' a minimalist grid of painted panels, each keyed to the precise skin tone of a friend, a neighbor, or stranger, functioned as an abstract group portrait of his multicultural world.  A recent series of abstract works by Kim signals an important shift: It still focuses on skin -- but this time that skin is bruised. Done around the time of the 2016 presidential election, the pigment-dyed canvases are less a celebration of multiculturalism than a subtle commentary on the rise of xenophobic and racist politics in the United States.  Likewise, today's wave of activism seems less concerned about representation -- inclusion of artists in exhibitions or hiring of more Asian-American museum staff -- than on larger issues like the surveillance of immigrant neighborhoods, income inequality, and criminalization of sex work -- that put their communities at risk.  This change in approach recently led 19 artists involved in Godzilla to withdraw from the exhibition planned by the Museum of Chinese in America in protest of what they called the museum's ''complicit support'' of the construction of a jail in Chinatown. (The museum received a $35 million concession from the city, part of a program to invest funds in neighborhoods that will be affected by the construction of facilities in the aftermath of Rikers Island's closure.)  The museum disputes this characterization. Nancy Yao Maasbach, the museum president, said, ''MOCA has always unalterably and vocally been against a Chinatown jail,'' adding that its position is that cultural funding for marginalized groups is ''critical to redefining the American narrative.''  The artist Betty Yu, a founder of Chinatown Art Brigade (CAB), said that ''The way to fight this kind of xenophobia and white supremacy is to organize and fight the root causes of structural racism and capitalism.'' With her co-founders Tomie Arai and ManSee Kong, and a network of other artists and organizers, CAB has been working over the past five years to oppose the gentrification of New York's Chinatown neighborhood and the resulting mass displacement.  The loss of affordable housing and the closing of garment factories employing thousands of new immigrants are not unconnected to the art world. More and more art galleries are moving into the area, driving up rents.  That encroachment has driven other activist groups to focus on the art world as an epicenter for talking about anti-Asian hate. Stop DiscriminAsian (S.D.A.), which came into being a year ago when Yi began to connect disparate Asian-centered groups and individuals working around the country, including Kim and Tam. As the group grew, the question of how to leverage their own positions in the art world became central.  ''It was one of the compelling things that we thought that we as arts workers could contribute to, just because of the fact that so many art spaces, at least in New York and L.A. and even the Bay Area, were physically adjacent to Asian communities,'' Tam said.  Because of shutdowns, S.D.A'.s work has largely been visible on social media -- Instagram above all. The organization has created multilingual graphics and downloadable posters, generated memes, commissioned short videos by artists, co-sponsored a Zoom webinar series titled ''Racism is a Public Health Issue,'' and disseminated information about resources for Asian-Americans facing discrimination and guidance for their allies.  After the uprisings sparked by George Floyd's murder at the hands of police last May, S.D.A. called on its followers to act in solidarity with Black protesters.  Its recent open letter against xenophobia and racial violence calls for the decriminalization of sex work and for alternatives to over-policing. It also asks signatories to understand the way Asian-Americans have enabled or participated (sometimes unwittingly) in white supremacy, and work to dismantle it. So far, more than 1,000 artists, curators and art workers have made the pledge.  One of the key strategies for today's artist-activists is creating visibility: calling attention to the often unseen and unnoted presence of Asian-American communities in cities and in the culture -- to their labor and contributions, and to the violence aimed at them.  Countering invisibility is at the heart of a short film by Astria Suparak titled ''Virtually Asian.'' It splices together scenes from science fiction movies in which urban landscapes are filled with stereotypical ''Asian'' signifiers, but the actual characters are almost exclusively white. She worked on it during the coronavirus lockdown.  ''The piece is part of a larger project examining 40 years of sci-fi films,'' Suparak said, ''and how white filmmakers envision a future that is inflected by Asian culture but devoid of actual Asian people.''  The project emerged, Suparak said, ''out of an ongoing erasure and racism and violence, and how both in real life and in mainstream media our varied and unique cultures are carelessly misidentified and jumbled together.''  The newly appointed Public Artist in Residence, Amanda Phingbodhipakkiya, began to work with the New York City Commission on Human Rights last August. As soon as she was hired, Phingbodhipakkiya began devising a public art project that she would take to the subways to address the way Asian diasporic communities in the city go largely unnoticed.  ''The commissioner and I went for a walk in Prospect Park,'' she recalled. ''I'm not sure she was looking to brainstorm that morning, but I hit the ground running. I felt like there was no time to waste, and our community couldn't take being invisible any longer. It was something I approached with extreme urgency.''  The result of the collaboration is a public art series titled ''I Still Believe in Our City'' installed on bus shelters, subway stations and, in a spectacular fashion, on the side of the Barclays Center. The choice of transportation hubs was deliberate, the artist said, since so many bias attacks have occurred there. Phingbodhipakkiya has also made them freely downloadable on her website.  Featuring a range of Asian-Americans with captions like ''I did not make you sick,'' ''We belong here,'' and ''I Am Not Your Scapegoat,'' they were recently featured on the cover of Time and have been showing up frequently on protest signs at rallies since the Atlanta shootings.  Events over the past year have inspired some artists to begin to address themes of Asian-American identities in their work. Over the past year, Tam, who has long explored questions of masculinity in his video, sculpture, and photography, has turned toward questions of Asian-ness. His solo exhibition ''Silent Spikes'' -- a reference to the immigrant Chinese laborers who built the transcontinental American railroads -- is at the Queens Museum until June 23. In it, Tam connects stereotypes about the Asian male body with the image of the cowboy and its role in Westward expansion.  Paul Chan is an artist newly spurred to action. His work, while often overtly political, has never addressed Asian issues head on -- until now. (Chan's now-defunct publishing imprint, Badlands Unlimited, issued my book on art, race and protest in 2018.) As soon as he heard about the mass shootings in Atlanta, he produced a poster that reads ''Anti-Asian=Anti-Murican.'' The piece is part of his ongoing ''New Proverbs'' series, which parodies signs used by the Westboro Baptist Church that he characterizes as ''arguably one of the pioneering Christian hate speech groups in America.''  ''The murders were the boiling point for me,'' Chan said. I couldn't let the moment go by without manifesting my feelings into form.''  As artists begin standing up to anti-Asian hate, there remains the question of how useful the term ''Asian-American'' is, given the range of experiences it's meant to describe. ''Anicka Yi has said this very clearly: 'What does it mean to be Asian-American in the 21st century?''' said Margaret Liu Clinton, a curator and member of S.D.A., who talks about the desire to develop pan-Asian conversations among the widest possible swath of art workers.  ''What continues to unfold is a shared awareness of how different our experiences are across gender, class, generation, immigration, and I think that's actually what is exciting about this work right now.''  Aruna D'Souza is a writer and a co-curator of ''Lorraine O'Grady: Both/And'' at the Brooklyn Museum.  Top, from left: Tomie Arai, ManSee Kong and Betty Yu founded the Chinatown Art Brigade. Above: A Byron Kim painting from his series ''Mud Root Ochre Leaf Star'' is an abstraction, but like the others, it suggests bruises under the skin. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JINGYU LIN FOR THE new_york_times; BYRON KIM AND JAMES COHAN) (C1); Clockwise from top: A poster at a New York bus stop is part of the public art series ''I Still Believe in Our City'' by Amanda Phingbodhipakkiya; ''The Curio Shop,'' an exhibition by the Asian-American artists collective Godzilla, exposed stereotypes about the Asian community in 1993; a still from the Chinatown Art Brigade's ''Here to Stay'' projection series; a still from Astria Suparak's ''Virtually Asian,'' whose theme is countering invisibility; and Paul Chan's poster, part of his series parodying signs filled with hate speech from the Westboro Baptist Church. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MK LUFF; ARTISTS SPACE; PAUL CHAN AND PRINTED MATTER; LOUIS CHAN; ASTRIA SUPARAK AND BERKELEY ART CENTER) (C5)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003e "
480		"    'Vicious Cycle': Perpetual Arms Race Between North and South Korea Intensifies  By Choe Sang-Hun  1,288 words 19 April 2021   11     The buildup over the last few years has threatened the delicate balance of peace on the Korean Peninsula.  SEOUL -- Pride and jealousy have driven North and South Korea to engage in propaganda shouting matches and compete over who could build a taller flagpole on their border. Now that one-upmanship is intensifying a much more dangerous side of their rivalry: the arms race.  Earlier this month, South Korea's dream of building its own supersonic fighter jet was realized when it unveiled the KF-21, developed at a cost of $7.8 billion. The country also recently revealed plans to acquire dozens of new American combat helicopters. When President Moon Jae-in visited the Defense Ministry's Agency for Defense Development last year, he said South Korea had ''developed a short-range ballistic missile with one of the largest warheads in the world.''  Unlike North Korea, the South lacks nuclear weapons. But in recent years the country has revved up its military spending, procuring American stealth jets and building increasingly powerful conventional missiles capable of targeting North Korean missile facilities and war bunkers.  The impoverished North has used those moves to justify expanding its own arsenal, and has threatened to tip its short-range missiles with nuclear warheads and make them harder to intercept. Experts warn that the ensuing arms race between the two countries is jeopardizing the delicate balance of peace on the Korean Peninsula.  ''As both sides act and react through arms buildups in the name of national defense, it will create a vicious cycle that will eventually undermine their defense and deepen their security dilemma,'' said Jang Cheol-wun, an analyst at the Korea Institute for National Unification, a government-funded research group.  The two Koreas have long been locked in a perpetual arms race. But Pyongyang's growing nuclear capabilities, coupled with the fear of a withdrawal of American troops from South Korea under President Donald J. Trump, added to those tensions.  While in office, Mr. Moon has increased South Korea's annual military spending by an average of 7 percent, compared with the 4.1 percent average of his predecessor. After diplomacy failed to eliminate the North's nuclear arsenal, Mr. Moon had to reassure South Koreans that their country was not a ''sitting duck,'' said Yoon Suk-joon, a researcher at the Korea Institute for Military Affairs.  Soon after Mr. Moon's visit to the Agency for Defense Development, South Korean media reported that the weapon he referred to was the Hyunmoo-4, a missile tested last year. According to missile experts, the Hyunmoo-4 can fly 497 miles, enough to target all of North Korea. Its two-ton payload -- unusually large for a short-range missile -- could destroy the North's underground missile bases.  Whether it could destroy the deep bunkers into which Kim Jong-un, the North's leader, would retreat in wartime depends on how deeply they are buried. According to missile experts, though, South Korea would likely need earth-penetrating nuclear weapons from the United States to destroy such prized targets.  Not to be outdone, on March 25 North Korea launched a new ballistic missile of its own and said the weapon flew 372 miles with a 2.5-ton warhead. The test prompted Mr. Moon to claim the following day that South Korea had ''world-class missile capabilities, enough to defend ourselves while abiding by our commitment to make the Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons.''  Washington has tried to prevent missile proliferation on the Korean Peninsula for decades. Under guidelines first adopted between Washington and Seoul in 1979, South Korea was barred from developing ballistic missiles with a range of more than 187 miles and a payload of more than 1,100 pounds. After North Korea attacked a South Korean island with a rocket barrage in 2010, South Korea demanded that Washington ease the restrictions so it could build more powerful missiles.  ''We hinted that we might scrap the missile guidelines unilaterally,'' said Chun Yung-woo, the national security adviser at the time. ''We told the Americans that if we didn't address concern over the North's growing nuclear and missile threat, more and more South Koreans would call for building nuclear bombs for ourselves.''  In 2012, Washington agreed to let South Korea deploy ballistic missiles with a range of up to 497 miles as long as it abided by the 1,100-pound warhead limit. It also said South Korea could exceed the payload limit by several times on missiles with shorter ranges.  South Korea has since tested missiles with growing ranges and bigger warheads, including the Hyunmoo-2A, Hyunmoo-2B and Hyunmoo-2C. Once North Korea launched its first intercontinental ballistic missile in 2017, Mr. Trump lifted the payload limit entirely, making way for the Hyunmoo-4.  Ever since taking power a decade ago, Mr. Kim has tried to build ICBMs capable of reaching the United States. But he has also threatened to tip the missile balance against South Korea.  In January, he indicated that his country had already built short-range nuclear missiles aimed at South Korea and vowed to improve them by making the warheads ''smaller, lighter and tactical.'' South Korea's strategy of deterrence has been based on the belief that the best chance it has against the North without nuclear weapons of its own is to build up a conventional missile defense and deploy ever more powerful ''bunker busters'' to make Mr. Kim fear for his life.  When North Korea tested its intercontinental ballistic missile in 2017, the United States and South Korea responded by launching their own ballistic missiles to demonstrate their ''deep-strike precision'' capabilities. In his book ''Rage,'' the journalist Bob Woodward wrote that the American missile traveled the exact distance between its launching point and the location from which Mr. Kim watched his I.C.B.M. launch.  Mr. Kim halted all missile tests in 2018, the year of the first of his two summit meetings with Mr. Trump. After their talks collapsed, North Korea resumed tests in 2019, rolling out three short-range ballistic missiles that were designed to counter the allies' antimissile capabilities.  North Korea's old fleet of Scud and Rodong missiles used liquid fuel and lacked precision. The country's new generation of missiles uses solid propellants, making them quicker to launch, easier to transport and more difficult to target. They also have greater accuracy and evasive maneuvering power that could confound the South's missile defense systems.  The new solid-fuel ballistic missile North Korea tested in March likely evaded the allies' radar during its low-altitude maneuvering, leading the South Korean military to estimate its range at 280 miles, not the 372 miles the North claimed, said Chang Young-keun, a missile expert at Korea Aerospace University. Mr. Chang said the missile could also likely increase range and warhead weight because it was powered by ''the largest solid-fuel rocket motor developed and tested in North Korea so far.''  The North's ICBMs still use liquid fuel, which takes hours to load before launching, making them vulnerable to American pre-emptive strikes. But in his January speech, Mr. Kim vowed to build solid-fuel ICBMs, presenting an even bigger challenge for American missile defenses. Such prospects deepen the fear among some South Koreans that Washington would be less likely to intervene if it, too, faced a possible North Korean nuclear attack.  This month, South Korean officials unveiled the first prototype of the KF-21, a supersonic fighter jet with a $7.8 billion price tag. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YONHAP/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003m "
481		"    The Threat to the Climate Posed by Plastics  328 words 19 April 2021   20     ''Clearly, Amazon is not the only culprit in this sorry mess,'' a reader writes. ''But it is the largest and the one whose positive actions would have the greatest impact.''  To the Editor:  ''Do We Really Need So Much Plastic?,'' by Pamela L. Geller and Christopher Parmeter (Op-Ed, April 6), performs an excellent service in pointing out the grave damage done to our oceans, fisheries and human health by the disposal and degradation from the enormous and unnecessary use of plastics for packaging by Amazon and others.  An extensive study of the plastics' effect on climate change by the Center for International Environmental Law concludes that by 2030 ''greenhouse gas emissions from the plastic life cycle ... could reach 1.34 gigatons per year -- equivalent to the emissions released by more than 295 new 500-megawatt coal-fired power plants.''  Thus, phasing out the manufacture and use of plastics needs to be a top priority to mitigate climate change, even more urgent than the ills addressed in the article.  Richard L. Ottinger  Mamaroneck, N.Y.  The writer is dean emeritus at Pace Law School and a former Democratic congressman from Westchester County.  To the Editor:  Clearly, Amazon is not the only culprit in this sorry mess. But it is the largest and the one whose positive actions would have the greatest impact. So here's what might be a major first step.  What if Amazon, which says it has phased out single-use plastic packaging at its more than 50 distribution centers in India, began rolling out what it is doing there to its distribution centers in the rest of the world? And then, because Amazon is not in the altruism business, license its processes to other companies? A one-two punch that benefits everyone.  Theodore Block  Delray Beach, Fla.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by The new_york_times; photograph by Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003c "
482		"    In Mourning, a Bryant Is Using Her Platform To Battle the Powerful  By Jonathan Abrams  1,664 words 19 April 2021   2     Through social media and a lawsuit, she is trying to hold law enforcement to account in ways that are uncommon for women, and especially for women of color.  For years, under the power dynamics of Los Angeles policing, many victims who have accused powerful law enforcement institutions of wrongdoing have found their charges batted aside or buried in bureaucratic inertia.  But in recent months the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department has faced a new, potent adversary: Vanessa Bryant.  By leveraging her wealth and celebrity, Bryant, 38, is flipping the usual script. Through social media posts and a lawsuit, she is holding authorities to account in ways that are uncommon for women, and especially for women of color. And she has done it all while she navigates her grief after the deaths of her 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, and her husband, Kobe Bryant, the Los Angeles Lakers star, who were killed in a helicopter crash near Calabasas, Calif., in January 2020.  She filed the suit in September against the Sheriff's Department, four deputies, the county and its fire department for invasion of privacy and negligence after deputies used personal cellphones to take pictures of the site that included the remains of her husband, their daughter and the seven others who died.  In mid-March, Vanessa Bryant shared an amended complaint and the names of the four accused deputies -- Joey Cruz, Rafael Mejia, Michael Russell and Raul Versales -- to her more than 14 million Instagram followers. County lawyers had tried to keep the identities of the deputies hidden, arguing, in part, that they could be the target of hackers. It was an odd argument, considering that the lawyers had said the images had been deleted. A federal judge sided with Bryant.  In the month since Bryant shared the names of the deputies, the call for law enforcement accountability has remained at the forefront of public debate through the murder trail of Derek Chauvin, the Minneapolis officer who knelt on the neck of George Floyd.  Bryant's public campaign against the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, a high-profile but long-troubled institution, has caught the attention of community activists and legal experts who are accustomed to families, especially those of color, silently hoping for but not receiving what they would consider justice. Vanessa Bryant is Mexican-American, and her husband was Black.  ''She has the ability to speak out and highlight what have been deep-seated and pervasive problems in the Sheriff's Department around corruption, secrecy and lack of accountability,'' said Priscilla Ocen, a member of the Los Angeles Sheriff's Civilian Oversight Commission and a professor at Loyola Law School. ''She has the means. She has the visibility and, importantly, she has the protection that is afforded based on her wealth and celebrity in ways that families in East Los Angeles or Compton just don't.''  Bryant, through her lawyer, declined to comment for this article. She has also filed a wrongful-death suit against Island Express Helicopters, the company that operated the helicopter that crashed.  ''Transparency promotes accountability,'' said Luis Li, one of Bryant's lawyers. ''We look forward to presenting Mrs. Bryant's case in open court.''  The Sheriff's Department, in response to a request for comment, referred to a tweet from Sheriff Alex Villanueva: ''We will refrain from trying this case in the media and will wait for the appropriate venue. Our hearts go out to all the families affected by this tragedy.''  The department released a statement last fall that said, ''As a result of the swift actions we took under extraordinary circumstances, no pictures made it into the public arena.''  The sheriff had assured Bryant that deputies had secured the crash scene to ensure her privacy, according to Bryant's suit.  The Los Angeles Times reported in February 2020 that a citizen filed a complaint after a deputy showed graphic photos of the crash victims at a bar. Instead of the complaint starting a formal inquiry, according to the suit, the deputies were told ''that if they came clean and deleted the photos, they would not face any discipline.''  The suit stated that Bryant ''privately sought information from the Sheriff's Department and Fire Department to assess whether she should brace for her loved ones' remains to surface on the internet.''  She asked if the photos had been secured and how far they had ventured. According to the suit, each department ''refused to respond to all but one of Mrs. Bryant's questions and asserted they had no legal obligation to assist.''  The suit stated that Cruz, then a deputy trainee, received copies of the photos from Mejia. Cruz is accused of showing them to his niece at his mother's house, while making a crude remark about the images of the bodies, and of showing the images at a restaurant in Norwalk, Calif., where he could be seen zooming in and out of the pictures on a security camera.  ''Many of us are on the receiving end of police mistreatment and we just have to swallow those indignities,'' said Jody Armour, a professor at the University of Southern California, whose father, Fred, used criminal law he taught himself in prison to be released after a significant portion of his sentence. ''Grin and bear it, because we don't have the social kind of capital to be taken as seriously as she's being taken.''  Law enforcement officials, Ocen said, typically shape the narratives that filter out of debated interactions. As a result, public opinion is often split about whom to sympathize with. Not in this case, she said.  ''There's universal sympathy, universal outrage for the conduct of the Sheriff's Department in trivializing, minimizing and desecrating the memory of Kobe Bryant and their daughter,'' Ocen said.  Villanueva, the sheriff, announced an investigation into the sharing of the photos in March 2020, before the suit was filed, and asked the county's Office of Inspector General to monitor it.  ''That was a sham,'' said Max Huntsman, the inspector general.  By that point, Huntsman said, his office had started an inquiry into Villanueva's announcement that the photos were ordered to be deleted. Additional efforts to monitor the investigation were stymied by the Sheriff's Department, which only offered him periodic, redacted updates, Huntsman said.  ''You can't really rely on an organization to investigate itself when it's the one that may have behaved improperly,'' he said. ''And when an elected official is the person who may have behaved improperly, then somebody else needs to investigate them if you want it to be at all credible and have real accountability.''  The watchdog positions of the oversight committee and inspector general were created as checks in the aftermath of department scandals before Villanueva's tenure as sheriff.  Ocen and eight other civilians make up the commission, which recommends department improvements. But the group does not have the authority to force the department to adopt policies or discipline personnel. Recently, voters granted the commission the power to subpoena records.  The relationship between the Sheriff's Department and the committee and inspector general is adversarial. Two years ago, the Sheriff's Department began a criminal investigation into whether Huntsman had illegally obtained internal records.  The issues highlighted by Bryant's suit represent a broader pattern within the Sheriff's Department, Huntsman said. In December, his office released a 17-page report highlighting what it called ''unlawful conduct'' by the department, such as threatening county officials, failing to disclose the names of officers involved in shootings and not enforcing Covid-19 safety directives.  A month earlier, the commission unanimously approved a resolution that condemned Villanueva's leadership and called for his resignation.  ''I'm on record saying that I think he's a criminal, and I'm on record as identifying a bunch of conduct by the Sheriff's Department under his watch that is completely unlawful,'' Huntsman said. ''We have a rogue law enforcement agency as a result of what they're doing, but that doesn't mean he has to resign. He has to start following the law.''  In September, Bryant took notice when Villanueva called on LeBron James to double the reward leading to information on a gunman who had ambushed and shot two deputies.  In response, Bryant posted screenshots from a Twitter user onto her Instagram story that read: ''He shouldn't be challenging LeBron James to match a reward or 'to step up to the plate.' He couldn't even 'step up to the plate' and hold his deputies accountable for photographing dead children.''  The suits, including ones from the families of the crash's victims, are ongoing. Some change has already occurred.  In September, Gov. Gavin Newsom of California signed into law a bill making it a misdemeanor for law enforcement and emergency medical workers to take photos of scenes that do not involve their work. The bill, H.R. 2655, was introduced by Assemblyman Mike Gipson, Democrat of Carson, and violations carry fines of up to $1,000. Gipson named it the Kobe Bryant Bill.  ''Emergency medical workers not only have a responsibility to the victims, but also I believe to the family,'' Gipson said. ''There's an obligation to protect the situation and not try to expose the family to further grief.''  He added: ''Hopefully this is a deterrent that will prevent this from happening again.''  A mural of Kobe Bryant and his daughter Gianna, who were among nine killed in a helicopter crash last year, below right. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMMA McINTYRE/GETTY IMAGES); Through social media posts and a lawsuit, Vanessa Bryant, top, at her husband and daughter's memorial service, has sought accountability from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FREDERIC J. BROWN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES; MARK J. TERRILL/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Sheriff Alex Villanueva   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00046 "
483		"    Warnings Of Politics Swaying Fed Cross Aisle  By Jeanna Smialek  1,708 words 19 April 2021   1     The Federal Reserve is proudly politically independent. That makes key discussions around climate change and racial inequity a balancing act.  In mid-2019, Jerome H. Powell fielded a question from reporters that he often faced in those days: Were politics, and particularly a pressure campaign coming from Donald J. Trump's White House to cut interest rates, influencing the Federal Reserve's policy stance?  Mr. Powell, the central bank chair, tried as he had for months to convince the public that he and his colleagues were not bowing to the Republican administration. ''We never take into account political considerations,'' he said.  Nearly two years later, the Fed again faces warnings of politicization -- but this time from Republican lawmakers who say it risks veering out of its lane as it focuses on what they portray as social priorities. Fed officials have ramped up their attention to climate change risks, racial economic equity and labor market inclusion, issues that many economists say are critical to the nation's future, but which Washington often treats as the purview of the partisan left.  As the Fed has taken a more expansive view of how it should go about achieving full employment, stable inflation and financial stability -- the loosely defined tasks Congress handed it -- conservative economists and lawmakers have sent letters and made statements expressing worry that it will stray too far. One of the most prominent critics is Patrick J. Toomey, a Republican from Pennsylvania and a powerful member of the Senate Banking Committee, who has labeled research by Fed regional banks as ''social studies essays.''  Such complaints don't carry much immediate threat, with Democrats in charge of Congress and the White House and Republicans unable to rein in the Fed legislatively. But the mere accusation that the Fed is bowing to Democrats is a striking inflection point for a central bank that has often lived in America's imagination as a friend of bankers and free-market enthusiasts. The timing is also surprising -- given Republicans lead the institution.  There's a reason for the shift, central bank watchers say: The Fed is trying to figure out how to do its job in a changing economy. Its new frontiers may align more with one party, but the Fed has spent its 107-year history evolving to fit the world around it.  ''It's not so much a give to political pressure as it is to economic reality,'' Steven Kelly, a researcher at Yale's Program on Financial Stability, said of the shift. That is particularly true when it comes to the focus on labor market equity, he said. ''We've been overwhelmed with years of low inflation and underemployment, and I don't think the Fed can ignore it any more.''  The Fed is in charge of guiding the speed of the economy by setting the price of money. It moves interest rates to get growth chugging during bad times or to prevent painful overheating during good ones. Its national and regional policymakers -- 18 at present -- have been appointed by the president or by business and community leaders and do their jobs independent of the White House and with only arms-length oversight from Congress.  The point of that autonomy is to keep political concerns, such as a presidential election, from preventing prudent policy.  Fed officials have guarded their independence fiercely, and to protect their status, they generally refuse to weigh in on heated political debates. But they have occasionally made exceptions for pressing economic issues.  Their opinions have at times been welcome to Republicans. Alan Greenspan, the Fed chair in the 1990s and early 2000s, famously endorsed George W. Bush's tax cuts in 2001, for instance.  But that started to change after the 2007 to 2009 financial crisis, as Republicans sometimes accused Mr. Greenspan's successors of being political. Ben S. Bernanke, who was initially appointed chair by Mr. Bush, was sometimes blasted for helping President Barack Obama by buying bonds to help the economy through a slow recovery. When Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chair from 2014 to 2018 and now the Treasury secretary, talked about skyrocketing inequality -- saying that ''it is appropriate to ask whether this trend is compatible with values rooted in our nation's history'' -- Republican lawmakers told her to get her ''nose'' out of places where it did not belong.  In the years since, the Fed has become more emboldened to discuss issues that have an economic impact, even when they fall into areas of partisan disagreement. Incumbent policymakers have pushed far beyond Ms. Yellen's Fed's quiet, often internal, efforts to look harder at inequality, labor market inclusion and climate change.  The central bank's regional branches -- which act of their own accord but communicate closely with their colleagues in Washington -- have focused on opportunity and inclusive growth and held conferences on the economics of climate change.  And Mr. Powell, who was appointed to the Fed by Mr. Obama but elevated to chair by Mr. Trump, ushered in a new policy framework along with his colleagues last year. It clarified that the Fed saw its full employment target as ''a broad-based and inclusive goal.'' Mr. Powell said last week that the tweak was a nod to concerns about economic inequality at a time when low inflation rates had given the Fed leeway to foster a hotter job market that pulled more people in and pushed wages higher.  And when the pandemic spurred a financial meltdown last March and April, the Fed introduced programs to keep credit flowing not just to Wall Street but also to Main Street, including state and local governments. In the subsequent months, Mr. Powell gently but firmly pushed for more congressional spending to shore up the economy.  The Fed's emergency efforts were initially welcomed by both parties, but ended in blowback that could have reined in its powers. Mr. Toomey held up stimulus negotiations in December 2020 to insert language that might have -- in its original format -- prevented the Fed from setting up programs that could help business or municipal borrowers without Congress' support in the future. His office said the wording, which was eventually watered down, would protect the Fed from becoming a tool for Democrats.  But Mr. Toomey has continued to raise concerns that the Fed is on the brink of losing its neutrality. Late last month, he sent a letter to Mary C. Daly, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, that questioned her bank's climate change and racial equality work.  ''The Federal Reserve's independence and careful adherence to nonpartisanship has allowed it to avoid being seen as a politicized body,'' he wrote, going on to criticize central bank writings including a ''racial equity primer'' the institution published on Medium last year.  ''The Federal Reserve may pursue mission creep or welcome itself to political capture,'' he continued. ''But such activities are inconsistent with its statutory responsibilities.''  Ms. Daly told reporters on Thursday that she would ''welcome the opportunity to discuss'' such matters with Mr. Toomey's staff.  Other Republicans worry that, by drilling into climate risks, Fed supervisors will send a signal to banks that they shouldn't lend to carbon-heavy industries. Influencing credit, they have said in letters, is not the Fed's job.  And Michael Strain, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, said he was concerned that the Fed's focus on fostering equity -- by driving down Black unemployment, for instance -- could make it too hesitant to lift interest rates, allowing inflation to bubble up.  But Fed officials say the central bank is being pragmatic, not political. Ms. Daly regularly points out that understanding climate change risks to the financial system is important for bank regulators and supervisors. Mr. Powell said during a webcast Wednesday that the Fed sees such issues ''through the lens of our existing mandates'' -- racial, gender and other disparities in economic outcomes ''hold the economy back,'' for example.  ''Also I think we now realize that unemployment can go low for quite a long time without inflation being a problem -- which will tend to help those groups,'' he said.  Still, the Fed knows it's in fraught territory. Mr. Powell avoids endorsing specific legislative packages. When Fed officials talk about inequality, they often discuss opportunity -- a framing with more bipartisan backing.  There is a risk if the Fed is seen as a ''quote unquote Democratic institution,'' said Peter Conti-Brown, a Fed historian at the University of Pennsylvania. It might lose support across political cycles, as with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which is largely seen as a liberal project.  ''The Fed always needs political support to do its job well and to have the autonomy it wants,'' said Sarah Binder, a political scientist at George Washington University who studies the Fed's politics. Pushback that led to reform has generally come from Democrats -- who have forced it to focus more on employment and reined in its ability to help Wall Street -- rather than Republicans, she noted.  And even now, some Democrats say the central bank could go further. Representative Rashida Tlaib, a Michigan Democrat, has pushed the Fed to do more to get cheaper credit to states and localities, for instance.  ''The Fed has yet to be truly bold in protecting the real economy,'' Ms. Tlaib said.  As the central bank tries to steer through the political moment, the fact that Mr. Powell is a Republican -- and popular on Capitol Hill across party lines -- may help ease the way.  ''I have a lot of respect for Chairman Powell,'' said Representative Andy Barr, Republican of Kentucky, who has at times worried about the Fed's climate push. Still, Mr. Barr said, the regional banks risked ''overstepping'' by getting specific about social issues, inconsistent with the Fed's long history of jealously guarding its independence.  ''The Fed, by delving into these sticky political issues, is inviting the political interference they don't want.''  Jerome H. Powell, left, the Federal Reserve chairman, has said, ''We never take into account political considerations.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEFANI REYNOLDS FOR THE new_york_times; NATE PALMER FOR THE new_york_times) (B2)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00043 "
484		"    No Driver in Tesla Crash That Killed 2, Officials Say  By Bryan Pietsch  662 words 19 April 2021   2     ''No one was driving the vehicle'' when the car crashed and burst into flames, killing two men, a constable said.  Two men were killed in Texas after a Tesla they were in crashed on Saturday and caught fire with neither of the men behind the wheel, the authorities said.  Mark Herman, the Harris County Precinct 4 constable, said that physical evidence from the scene and interviews with witnesses led officials ''to believe no one was driving the vehicle at the time of the crash.''  The vehicle, a 2019 Model S, was going at a ''high rate of speed'' around a curve at 11:25 p.m. local time when it went off the road about 100 feet and hit a tree, Constable Herman said. The crash occurred in a residential area in the Woodlands, an area about 30 miles north of Houston.  The men were 59 and 69 years old. One was in the front passenger seat and one in the rear seat, Constable Herman said.  He said that minutes before the crash, the men's wives watched them leave in the Tesla after they said they wanted to go for a drive and were talking about the vehicle's Autopilot feature.  The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said last month that it was investigating nearly two dozen crashes involving Teslas that either were using Autopilot or might have been using it.  The causes of death were unclear on Sunday. Positive identification had not yet been made because of the duration of the fire, Constable Herman said.  ''It took four hours to put out a fire that normally would have taken a matter of minutes,'' Constable Herman said, adding that it took more than 30,000 gallons of water to extinguish the fire.  Regulators have raised concerns about the batteries used in electric vehicles. The National Transportation Safety Board warned in a 2020 report that the batteries can pose safety risks to emergency responders.  Mitchell Weston, chief investigator at the Harris County Fire Marshal's Office, said that while the batteries are ''generally safe,'' impacts at high speeds can result in ''thermal runaway,'' which causes an ''uncontrolled contact'' between different materials in the batteries.  Thermal runaway can lead to fires, as well as ''battery reignition,'' even after an initial fire is put out, the safety board warned in its report. Mitsubishi Electric warns that ''thermal runaway can lead to catastrophic results, including fire, explosion, sudden system failure, costly damage to equipment, and possibly personal injury.''  The fire marshal's office was investigating the fire in the crash, a spokeswoman said. Constable Herman said his department was working with the federal authorities to investigate.  He said that law enforcement officials had been in contact with Tesla on Saturday for ''guidance on a few things'' but declined to discuss the nature of the conversations.  Tesla, which has disbanded its public relations team, did not respond to a request for comment.  Elon Musk, Tesla's chief executive, earlier on Saturday had promoted a recent safety report from the company, writing on Twitter that ''Tesla with Autopilot engaged now approaching 10 times lower chance of accident than average vehicle.''  Tesla, which on its website calls Autopilot the ''future of driving,'' says the feature allows its vehicles to ''steer, accelerate and brake automatically within its lane.'' However, it warns that ''current Autopilot features require active driver supervision and do not make the vehicle autonomous.''  In 2016, a driver in Florida was killed in a Tesla Model S that was in Autopilot mode and failed to brake for a tractor-trailer that made a left turn in front of it.  The men killed in the crash said just before they left that they wanted to go for a drive and were talking about the vehicle's driverless features, an official said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KTRK-TV - ABC13 FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00040 "
485		"    F.D.R. Didn't Just Fix the Economy  By Jamelle Bouie  1,219 words 19 April 2021   20     He saved democracy itself.  The New Deal was more than a recovery program for the economy. It was, as the historian Eric Rauchway argues in his new book, ''Why the New Deal Matters,'' a recovery program for American democracy.  ''I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people,'' Franklin Roosevelt declared at the 1932 Democratic National Convention in Chicago.  Roosevelt had broken tradition to accept his party's nomination and deliver a speech in person. And in that speech, he promised a program based on the ''simple moral principle'' that the ''welfare and the soundness of a nation depend first upon what the great mass of the people wish and need'' and second on ''whether or not they are getting it.''  Aware of the challenge ahead of him should he win the presidency -- nearly a quarter of Americans were out of work and the economy was shrinking by double digits -- Roosevelt concluded his address with a call to action. ''Let us all here assembled constitute ourselves prophets of a new order of competence and of courage,'' he said. ''This is more than a political campaign; it is a call to arms. Give me your help, not to win votes alone, but to win in this crusade to restore America to its own people.''  These days we tend to think of the New Deal as a very large stimulus program. And that was true, to an extent. The Public Works Administration, established under the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933, spent around $3.3 billion (roughly $65 billion in today's dollars) on public buildings and infrastructure. The Works Progress Administration, established two years later, went even further, spending almost twice as much over eight years to employ more than 15 percent of the nation's labor force.  But as Roosevelt suggested in his acceptance speech, the New Deal was bigger than just a recovery program.  Rauchway, a professor of history at the University of California, Davis, writes: ''The foundational belief of the New Deal was the conviction that democracy in the United States -- limited and flawed through it remained -- was better kept than abandoned, in the hope of strengthening and extending it.''  It was not clear, when Roosevelt took office, that democracy would survive the long night of the Depression. To show what could have happened in the absence of recovery, Rauchway recounts the story of the Bonus Expeditionary Force -- veterans of the First World War who occupied parts of Washington in the last months of the Hoover administration, demanding early payment of their ''bonus,'' or promised compensation, for service. On one hand were the marchers, thousands of disaffected veterans and their families, and their leader Walter Waters, who drew inspiration from Mussolini's Black Shirts and Hitler's Brown Shirts, and who proposed reinventing his Bonus Army as a new ''Khaki Shirt'' organization.  Here's Rauchway:  The Bonus Army's newspaper drew international comparisons to prove the veterans' importance: ''For five years Hitler was lampooned and derided, but today he controls Germany. Mussolini before the war was a tramp printer driven from Italy because of his political views. But today he is a world figure ... The Khaki Shirts would be essentially American'' -- though similar to the backers of those strongmen overseas.  On the other hand were those Americans at the top who believed democracy had failed the country. In Gen. Douglas MacArthur's draconian response to the Bonus marchers -- burning their camps and driving them out of the city, against President Herbert Hoover's explicit orders -- they saw a model for how the government might restore ''order'' to the United States. ''To his aide Rexford Tugwell,'' Rauchway notes, ''Roosevelt described Douglas MacArthur as one of the 'most dangerous men in the country.'''  MacArthur appealed to Americans who yearned for a strongman, who believed ''democracy had run its course and that the totalitarians had grasped the necessities of the time.'' Roosevelt said that among people he knew -- rich people, who came from privileged backgrounds and who found the mobilized people deeply alarming -- such talk was commonplace.  Roosevelt had to prove to all Americans that self-government worked; that it could restore confidence and tackle the economic crisis without compromising the principles of the revolution and the founding. That's why Roosevelt embraced public employment and its direct line to ordinary Americans, so government could ''restore the close relationship with its people which is necessary to preserve our democratic form of government.'' That's why he would direct his administration to build dams in the Tennessee Valley, bridges in California's Bay Area and a second tunnel connecting New Jersey and New York -- to show Americans that the government could do big things and do them well. The New Deal libraries and parks and postal offices and other buildings also stand as monuments to collective effort and the public good, to the idea that democracy works best when it works for most of us, and that through this effort, we come closer to the ''more perfect union'' of our Constitution's preamble.  The New Deal was not perfect. It liberated some Americans from want at the same time that it deprived others of their freedom. It opened new opportunities for Black Americans -- providing jobs, education and even housing to citizens who lived in need of each -- at the same time that it, as Rauchway writes, ''left existing segregation untouched and even expanded it into new areas, perpetuating it for new generations.'' And yet the breakthrough of the New Deal -- the way it reshaped the nation's politics and transformed the relationship between state and citizen -- set the stage for the social revolutions of subsequent decades. The New Deal brought, in Roosevelt's phrasing, ''the broadening conception of social justice'' to American life. And once introduced, it could not be removed. Or, as he said in his January 1934 message to Congress,  Civilization cannot go back; civilization must not stand still. We have undertaken new methods. It is our task to perfect, to improve, to alter when necessary, but in all cases to go forward.  Put another way, you can think of the New Deal as a third founding moment in the history of American democracy. And in the same way that we still struggle to live up to the ideals of political equality expressed in our first founding and those of racial equality expressed in our second, we have not yet realized the ideal of economic equality and opportunity put forth in the New Deal.  That's why at this moment of crisis -- for our economy, for our climate and for our democracy -- the New Deal remains a lodestar for liberals and the left alike, from Joe Biden to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. It is a model, it is an aspiration, it is a live part of our political imagination.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN, VIA GETTY IMAGES)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00034 "
486		"    Bobcat Attacks Woman, And Husband Fights Back  By Michael Levenson  825 words 19 April 2021   17     Kristi Wade credits her husband, Happy Wade, with saving her life when a rabid bobcat attacked her in their North Carolina driveway.  Just before the bobcat attacked, the quiet subdivision where Happy and Kristi Wade live in Burgaw, N.C., was the very picture of suburban tranquillity.  Mr. Wade was carrying a pan of brownies, and Ms. Wade was carrying their cat, Caroline Faith, in a carrier. It was a Friday morning, and they were on their way to a veterinarian in Wilmington, about 25 miles away, for a routine appointment.  ''Good morning,'' Mr. Wade said cheerfully to a passing jogger before remarking, ''I need to wash my car.''  That's when Ms. Wade said she heard an angry growl. She thought it was just a neighborhood cat. But it was a rabid bobcat crawling out from under a car in the driveway.  ''I won't soon forget the look in that cat's eyes,'' she said in an interview. ''It had its sights set on me, and that's when I ran.''  ''Oh, my God! Oh, my God!'' she screamed, as the bobcat sank its teeth into her left hand and then crawled up her back, and onto her shoulder.  The attack was captured by the Wades' home-security camera in a video that ricocheted across the internet after Mr. Wade shared it with his boss, who shared it with someone else, whose nephew put it on TikTok, Ms. Wade said.  The 46-second clip has put a spotlight on Mr. Wade's split-second reaction to his wife's screams.  Mr. Wade ran to his wife, pulled the bobcat off her back and held the animal aloft with his bare hands, as it writhed and growled.  ''Oh, my God, it's a bobcat!'' he screamed.  Then he hurled the animal across the lawn.  ''Get out! Get out! Get out!'' Mr. Wade, who has a concealed-carry permit, shouted before pulling out a pistol. But the bobcat darted back under the car. Using an expletive, Mr. Wade shouted that he would ''shoot'' the animal and warned the jogger to stay away.  ''Watch out!'' he said. ''It's a bobcat that attacked my wife.''  After the clip ends, Mr. Wade shot the bobcat, as did a sheriff's deputy who had responded to a 911 call, Ms. Wade said.  The Pender County Sheriff's Office confirmed that a bobcat was killed on April 9 in the Creekside subdivision in Burgaw. Testing at the North Carolina State Laboratory of Public Health confirmed that the animal was rabid, the sheriff's office said.  Ms. Wade said her husband was not happy to have shot the bobcat. The couple has two cats and a dog and serve on the board of a local humane society, Ms. Wade said.  ''We're animal lovers and it was very difficult for my husband to do that,'' she said. ''It had charged back out. He knew he had no other choice.''  Later, Ms. Wade said that she and Mr. Wade learned that the bobcat had attacked another neighbor about 10 minutes earlier.  Ms. Wade said she and Mr. Wade went to the emergency room after the attack. She had bite marks on her hand, scratches on her arm, claw marks on her back and other wounds, she said. Her husband had bite marks on his hand and deep scratches. Both were given antibiotics and the rabies vaccine, she said.  Ted Stankowich, a behavioral ecologist who specializes in mammals at California State University, Long Beach, said he was ''really shocked'' by the video.  Bobcats, which live in most parts of the United States, typically avoid humans and prey on rodents, rabbits and reptiles, he said.  ''Any rabid animal is going to be far more aggressive around humans,'' Dr. Stankowich said. ''But a normal bobcat would typically not come into a neighborhood like that, into suburbia, let alone attack a person like that.''  Ms. Wade said her injuries could have been far worse if her husband had not intervened.  ''He saved my life,'' she said. ''If he had not been there, I do not know where I'd be, or in what shape I'd have been in. I do not know how I would have fended it off myself.''  Ms. Wade added that she was ''not the least bit surprised'' that Mr. Wade had put himself in harm's way that morning.  ''That's just the kind of person he is,'' she said. ''We've been married for 30 years. I met him when I was 15, and there was never a doubt in my life how much he loves me and how much he would do for me.''  Home security video shows Happy Wade just after he pulled a bobcat off his wife, Kristi, outside their home in Burgaw, N.C. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WECT FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003z "
487		"    New Police Reform Laws Seize on Calls for Change  By Steve Eder, Michael H. Keller and Blacki Migliozzi  2,404 words 19 April 2021   1     In February, Illinois enacted a law that rewrote many of the state's rules of policing, and mandated that officers wear body cameras. In March, New York City moved to make it easier for citizens to sue officers. This month, the Maryland legislature -- which decades ago became the first to adopt a Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights -- became the first to do away with it.  In recent months, state and city lawmakers across the country have seized on a push for reform prompted by outrage at the killing of George Floyd last May, passing legislation that has stripped the police of some hard-fought protections won over the past half-century.  ''Police unions in the United States are pretty much playing defense at the moment,'' said Brian Marvel, a San Diego officer and the president of California's largest law enforcement labor organization. ''You have groups of people that are looking for change -- and some groups are looking for radical change.''  Over 30 states have passed more than 140 new police oversight and reform laws, according to a new_york_times analysis of data from the National Conference of State Legislatures.  Amber Widgery, a policy expert at the organization, said many of the laws -- restricting the use of force, overhauling disciplinary systems, installing more civilian oversight and requiring transparency around misconduct cases -- give states far more influence over policing practices that have typically been left to local jurisdictions.  ''We're seeing the creation of really strong, centralized state guidance that sets a baseline for police accountability, behavior and standards'' for all departments, she said.  It's a remarkable, nationwide and in some places bipartisan movement that flies directly counter to years of deference to the police and their powerful unions. But the laws, and new rules adopted by police departments across the country, are not enough to satisfy demands by Black Lives Matter and other activists who are pushing for wholesale reforms, cultural shifts and cutbacks at law enforcement agencies.  ''The focus has been so heavily on what do we do after harm has already been committed -- after the police have already engaged in misconduct -- and far less focused on how do we stop this from the beginning,'' said Paige Fernandez, an advocate at the American Civil Liberties Union.  While Derek Chauvin, the Minneapolis officer accused of murdering Mr. Floyd, was on trial last week, episodes in Virginia, Minnesota and Illinois -- which have all enacted reforms -- underscored how the new laws would not always prevent traumatic outcomes.  A police officer in Virginia was seen on video pointing a gun at a Black Army lieutenant and pepper-spraying him during a traffic stop. A veteran officer in Minnesota fatally shot 20-year-old Daunte Wright, a Black man, after pulling him over. And video recordings showed a Chicago officer chasing and fatally firing at 13-year-old Adam Toledo, a Latino, after he appeared to toss aside a gun while obeying commands to raise his hands. The events ignited fresh protests and more questions about why police interventions escalated into deaths of people of color.  ''People aren't necessarily happy with the change they're seeing, because the same thing keeps happening,'' said Stevante Clark, whose brother Stephon was killed by the Sacramento police in 2018. California enacted a law named after his brother that raised the standard for using lethal force, but Mr. Clark sees a need for the federal government to impose national regulations.  House Democrats recently passed a sweeping police bill designed to address racial discrimination and excessive use of force, but it lacks the Republican support needed in the Senate. President Biden has also fallen short on a campaign promise to establish an oversight commission during his first 100 days in office.  Nearly 1,000 people have been shot and killed by the police annually in recent years, according to data from The Washington Post, which also shows that officers fatally shot Black and Hispanic people at a much higher rate by population than whites.  Some activists have cheered new laws that could curb police misconduct, mainly in states and cities controlled by Democrats. But they also fear that those changes could be offset in Republican jurisdictions that are proposing to expand police protections or impose harsher penalties for protest-related activities like blocking highways and defacing public property.  Police unions, along with many Republican lawmakers, have resisted some of the reform efforts, arguing that they will imperil public safety. But there have been some signs of bipartisanship.  In Colorado, Republicans joined with Democrats, who control the statehouse, to pass a sweeping bill less than a month after Mr. Floyd's death. The law banned chokeholds, required officers to intervene if they witnessed excessive force and mandated body cameras statewide within three years, among other provisions. The Colorado legislature became the first to eliminate immunity from civil rights accusations, allowing officers to face claims in state court.  John Cooke, a Republican state senator and former Colorado county sheriff, worked with Democrats to revise their proposals. Officials, he said, realized that ''we need to do something and we need to do it now.''  Republican-led states including Iowa and Utah have implemented changes, too, banning or restricting chokeholds, among other measures. But Iowa's Republican-controlled House recently passed a ''Back the Blue'' bill that Black lawmakers said could unfairly affect peaceful protesters and amounted to ''retaliation'' against Democrats.  In Maryland, the Democratic-controlled legislature overrode a veto by the state's Republican governor to pass a sweeping reform package. Outlining his objections, Gov. Larry Hogan said the laws would be damaging to ''police recruitment and retention, posing significant risks to public safety.''  Importantly, the package erases the Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights in the state, a landmark achievement for police unions in the 1970s. Decades ago, similar protections spread across the country in union contracts and local laws, but its passage in Maryland gave broad protections to every department at once.  Critics said the policing bill of rights reduced accountability: Officers could wait days before being questioned about an allegation; only fellow officers could conduct interrogations; some complaints could be expunged from an officer's file after a few years.  ''It is fitting that Maryland is the first state to repeal it as they opened this Pandora's box in the first place,'' said Caylin Young, public policy director at the A.C.L.U. of Maryland.  Maryland's new laws contain a range of provisions to rein in policing: a body-camera requirement for officers regularly interacting with the public, prison sentences of up to 10 years for violations of the state's use-of-force policy, and restrictions on so-called no-knock warrants. (Those warrants drew national attention last year when the police in Louisville, Ky., fatally shot Breonna Taylor, an unarmed emergency medical technician, after smashing through her apartment door during a botched drug raid. Louisville banned the warrants last summer, and state lawmakers limited their use this month).  Another Maryland law, named after Anton Black, requires disclosure of information about police misconduct investigations. The 19-year-old died in 2018 after officers pinned him to the ground following a struggle. (Prosecutors did not pursue charges, but his family has sued in federal court.) La Toya Holley, Mr. Black's sister, said that the new laws would help but that a broader shift in policing was needed.  ''That culture -- that mentality -- has to do a complete 180 if we want to enact change,'' she said. ''And it has to start in-house with the police departments, the captains, the chiefs and also the boards that are actually certifying these officers.''  Maryland's new standards follow a decision by the Baltimore state's attorney, Marilyn Mosby, to stop prosecuting minor crimes like prostitution and drug possession. ''When we criminalize these minor offenses that have nothing to do with public safety, we expose people to needless interaction with law enforcement that, for Black people in this country, can often lead to a death sentence,'' Ms. Mosby told the Baltimore City Council last week.  Other proposals to reduce police interventions have caught on elsewhere. In February, Berkeley, Calif., barred officers from pulling over motorists for not wearing a seatbelt, misuse of high-beam headlights or expired registrations. The moves were in part based on research showing that Black motorists in the city were about six times more likely to be pulled over than white motorists were, although the police union raised concerns that the reforms created ''significant safety consequences for citizens and officers.''  In Virginia, a law went into effect last month limiting the minor traffic violations for which officers should stop vehicles. It also prohibits officers from conducting searches solely based on smelling marijuana.  ''As a Black woman who understands there's been a disproportionate abuse of Black and brown people by police officers, we had to do something to prevent these injuries and killings of people of color,'' said L. Louise Lucas, a Democratic state senator from Virginia, who proposed the bill and spoke of her own mistreatment by law enforcement. ''This is an age-old story for Black people,'' she added.  Many of the new rules adopted by states and cities have similarities, focusing on the use of force or accountability after the fact. Two of the country's largest states, California and New York, have been at the forefront of that push -- and some cities have taken more dramatic steps.  Los Angeles, Oakland and San Francisco, for example, last year proposed cuts to their police department budgets. Activists have called for reducing police funding and diverting some of that money to mental health initiatives and social services. But those demands have often met with resistance, not only from law enforcement but also from Black residents and officials who fear that crime would surge.  In fact, in Oakland, some of those cuts, which were enacted because of a budget deficit, were reversed after a spike in murders and attacks on Asian-Americans.  ''I understand the conversation about defunding and reimagining the police, but these are real people dying,'' said Sgt. Barry Donelan, the head of the Oakland police union. The city has had over 40 homicides so far this year compared with 13 at the same time last year.  Immediately after Mr. Floyd's death, the Minneapolis City Council voted to disband its police force, only to be overruled by a city charter commission.  Last year, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York ordered nearly 500 local jurisdictions, including New York City, to devise plans to ''reinvent and modernize'' policing in their communities, threatening to withhold funding if they failed to do so.  The governor has spoken of the need to ''resolve the tension'' between police and communities. ''You don't have the option of ending the police, and you don't have the option of continuing with distrust of the police,'' he said on Wednesday to reporters. ''So the relationship has to be repaired.''  DeRay Mckesson, an activist and podcast host who helped found Campaign Zero, an initiative to end police violence, said that he saw progress on state and local legislation, especially around the use of force, but that there was plenty of unfinished business around accountability and how the police operate. ''These issues will have to be things that we work on every year until we finish,'' he said.  Mr. Mckesson, whose organization tracks legislative activity and works with local leaders on policy, said that unions had maintained their robust lobbying presence but that key lawmakers had become less deferential to them in places like Maryland.  ''They were like, 'We know what's right and we won't be swayed by the police just saying it's going to cause fear,''' he said.  The police remain eager to be heard. ''Most of our members across the country are finding that you have state legislatures that are including law enforcement in on the discussion,'' said Patrick Yoes, the national president of the Fraternal Order of Police, which represents hundreds of thousands of officers. ''Then you have those that are pretty much freezing them out and have already made up their mind about the direction they're going -- because they believe that this reform somehow is going to save the day.''  Police advocates point to statistics showing increases in violent crimes as evidence that early reforms are backfiring. Nationally, murder rates increased significantly last year, according to preliminary F.B.I. data released last month, though experts have cited a number of possible factors that could be at work, including the pandemic. Excluding law enforcement from the discussions is leading to bad policy, the advocates say.  ''They've been largely shut out of this conversation, which I don't think is a good thing because they have experience and knowledge,'' said Rafael A. Mangual, a senior fellow at the conservative-leaning Manhattan Institute. ''And I think part of that is just a reflection of the moment that we're in.''  For Carmen Best, who recently retired as police chief in Seattle, cultural changes in policing will come with clear standards and consequences for misconduct. ''People will think twice because they know there are repercussions,'' she said.  To get there, she said, there needs to be frank discussion about why ''horrific things'' sometimes happen to minorities when they interact with the police, including Adam Toledo, whose killing by a Chicago police officer is under investigation.  ''At the end of the day, we all watched a 13-year-old die,'' she said. ''That's hard on everybody.''  Reporting was contributed by Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Thomas Fuller, Jesus Jiménez, Christina Morales and Katie Rogers.  Reporting was contributed by Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Thomas Fuller, Jesus Jiménez, Christina Morales and Katie Rogers.  A protest last week after the death of Daunte Wright, a 20-year-old Black man who was shot and killed by the police during a traffic stop in Brooklyn Center, Minn.; Above, protesting in Brooklyn Center last week after Mr. Wright's death; at left, a memorial. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE new_york_times); La Toya Holley's brother Anton Black died in a struggle with the police in Greensboro, Md. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTON JAE BETHEL FOR THE new_york_times) (A16)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003w "
488		"    Child Care Is Every Bit as Essential as Bridges  By Anne-Marie Slaughter  1,273 words 19 April 2021   21     The men and women who went to work and war during World War II were backed by a care economy. We need one too.  I have spent the past two weeks reading about the infrastructure debate with mounting rage. When a reporter asked me recently why I felt so strongly, I sputtered, groping for the words. Ultimately, however, the answer is simple. Insisting that there is actually a fixed definition of what infrastructure is -- bridges, but not baby care -- perfectly encapsulates the ways in which the world is still shaped by men. Not just conservative men, but men across the political spectrum. Men today, that is: Three-quarters of a century ago, the Greatest Generation recognized that both forms of infrastructure were essential to the war effort.  But that idea is foreign to Republicans who are framing their fight against the Biden infrastructure plan in terms of what some call ''real infrastructure'' -- roads, bridges, ports and airports -- versus what has been dubbed ''liberal social programs,'' including supporting home-based and community care. This is a view shared by many men on the center and the left who would otherwise support care provisions as a matter of social policy. As Jordan Weissman, a Slate business reporter, blithely tweeted: ''We don't have to pretend that every good thing is 'infrastructure.'''  This is not a matter of semantics. Infrastructure ''of a country, society, or organization,'' according to the Collins Dictionary, ''consists of the basic facilities ... which enable it to function.'' I've inserted an ellipsis in place of the clause ''such as transportation, communications, power supplies, and buildings.'' That is the hard physical infrastructure that seemingly everyone agrees is what infrastructure ''really'' means.  But let's take at face value that infrastructure are those facilities that are essential for everyone to do their jobs. It makes sense that men with wives at home to take on the 16-hour-a-day care responsibilities involved in raising children, supporting aged parents or otherwise tending to the sick, those with disabilities and the vulnerable would need roads and bridges to grease the wheels of commerce and allow them access to their desks and deals. But let's imagine -- it's not that hard -- a scenario in which those same men didn't have wives at home and yet still wanted to have children, or to ensure that their own parents received love and support in their final years. In that case, they, too, might just find that care facilities were themselves just as ''essential'' to their ability to do paid work.  That is exactly what the men in Congress concluded when the government was actively recruiting women into factories to produce the equipment and weapons needed to fight World War II. In 1941, they passed the Defense Public Works law of 1941 (known as the Lanham Act) to provide for the building of infrastructure like water and sewer treatment, housing and schools, all of which were recognized as necessary supports to the war effort. Two years later, Congress relied on this authorization to allocate $52 million (about $800 million today) to build over 3,000 federally subsidized day care centers.  That is even what the federal government concluded just last year, under the Trump administration. The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency issued guidance on who should be considered ''essential critical infrastructure workers.'' It included child care workers of many kinds and ''human services providers'' bringing things like food and personal care to ''older adults, people with disabilities, and others with chronic health conditions.'' Sounds like care to me.  Classifying care workers as critical infrastructure workers but denying that care facilities are critical infrastructure would be ironic if it were not so infuriating.  And do we really need to consult the statute books? Many Americans who have been fortunate enough to work from home but who also have care responsibilities have now spent over a year with children unable to attend school or day care full-time. In January 2021, according to the Census Bureau, some 1.6 million fewer mothers living with school-age children were actively working compared with a year before. Some 705,000 of those moms had ''given up on work outside the home entirely.'' To be sure, some of this job loss was due to the pandemic-related closing of service and hospitality jobs, but a study from August found that one in three women of childbearing age cited child care as the reason for leaving their jobs. Roughly one-third of essential workers have a child at home; when schools and day care closed, they often had to choose between their children and their jobs. And tens of thousands of our parents and grandparents died alone in institutions when they would rather have had home-based care.  The value and visibility of care goes far beyond the definition of infrastructure. It is the central question of 21st-century feminism, and one far too long ignored or downplayed not only by men but also by many prominent women, particularly wealthy white women who have been able to leverage the privilege of race and class. Care feminism has long taken a back seat to career feminism. Advocating for child or elder care may be less glamorous and newsworthy than breaking glass ceilings to become the first woman in a role traditionally reserved for a man, but both are necessary if we are ever to achieve true gender equality.  Today, we have the chance to see care work as the essential work that it is, the work that makes other work possible, the work that develops young brains and determines the extent to which our children will be able to learn and live up to their potential for the rest of their lives, the work that determines who we really are as a society when it comes to the frail and vulnerable among us. It is work we all hope will be performed as well as possible when our turn comes to depend on caregivers at the end of our lives.  The first step toward that world, as the labor and care activist Ai-jen Poo has long argued, and as feminist economists like Nancy Folbre, Candace Howes and Carrie Leana have been outlining for decades, is an ''infrastructure of care.'' One of those economists is Heather Boushey, now a member of President Biden's Council of Economic Advisers. That, presumably, is one reason President Biden is even addressing the question. Another may be more personal: Nearly a half-century ago, he was a single, working father with two young children; within the past decade he saw up close just how much care is needed for family members struck down by cancer or waylaid by addiction. But not everyone in government has such a visceral reminder of what is at stake.  So yes, let's by all means have an infrastructure debate. But let's begin by simply asking all Americans, what are the basic facilities necessary to enable our society to function? And then let's fund the answer.  Anne-Marie Slaughter is chief executive of New America, a think tank focusing on a range of public policy issues.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPHS VIA ALAMY; SHUTTERSTOCK)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00033 "
489		"    With Much to Lose, Afghan Women Fear Stifling Return to Past  By Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Fatima Faizi and Najim Rahim  1,700 words 19 April 2021   1     KABUL, Afghanistan -- Farzana Ahmadi watched as a neighbor in her village in northern Afghanistan was flogged by Taliban fighters last month. The crime: Her face was uncovered.  ''Every woman should cover their eyes,'' Ms. Ahmadi recalled one Taliban member saying. People silently watched as the beating dragged on.  Fear -- even more potent than in years past -- is gripping Afghans now that U.S. and NATO forces will depart the country in the coming months. They will leave behind a publicly triumphant Taliban, who many expect will seize more territory and reinstitute many of the same oppressive rules they enforced under their regime in the 1990s.  The new_york_times spoke to many Afghan women -- members of civil society, politicians, journalists and others -- about what comes next in their country, and they all said the same thing: Whatever happens will not bode well for them.  Whether the Taliban take back power by force or through a political agreement with the Afghan government, their influence will almost inevitably grow. In a country in which an end to nearly 40 years of conflict is nowhere in sight, many Afghans talk of an approaching civil war.  ''All the time, women are the victims of men's wars,'' said Raihana Azad, a member of Afghanistan's Parliament. ''But they will be the victims of their peace, too.''  When the Taliban governed Afghanistan from 1996 to 2001, it barred women and girls from taking most jobs or going to school, and practically made them prisoners in their own homes.  After the U.S. invasion to topple the Taliban and defeat Al Qaeda in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the Western rallying cry for bringing women's rights to the already war-torn country seemed to many a noble undertaking. The cause helped sell the war to Americans who cringed at the sight of a B-52 carpet bombing insurgent positions.  Some schools reopened, giving young women and girls a chance at education and careers that many before them didn't have. But even before American troops touched Afghan soil, some women had already risked their lives by secretly pursuing an education and teaching themselves.  Over two decades, the United States spent more than $780 million to promote women's rights in Afghanistan. The result is a generation who came of age in a period of hope for women's equality.  Though progress has been uneven, girls and women now make up about 40 percent of students. They have joined the military and police, held political office, become internationally recognized singers, competed in the Olympics and on robotics teams, climbed mountains and more -- all things that were nearly impossible at the turn of the century.  As the conflict dragged on over 20 years and setbacks on the battlefield mounted, American officials and lawmakers frequently pointed to the gains of Afghan women and girls as proof of success of the nation-building endeavor -- some measure of progress to try to justify the loss of life, both American and Afghan, and billions of dollars spent in the war effort.  Even in the twilight weeks before President Biden made his final decision to pull out all U.S. troops by September, some lawmakers and military officials argued that preserving women's rights was one reason to keep American forces there.  ''I remember when Americans came and they said that they will not leave us alone, and that Afghanistan will be free of oppression, and will be free of war and women's rights will be protected,'' said Shahida Husain, an activist in Afghanistan's southern Kandahar Province, where the Taliban first rose and now control large stretches of territory. ''Now it looks like it was just slogans.''  Across the country, schools are now being forced to contemplate whether they will be able to stay open.  Firoz Uzbek Karimi, the chancellor of Faryab University in the north, oversees 6,000 students -- half of them women.  ''Female students who live in Taliban areas have been threatened several times, but their families send them secretly,'' Mr. Karimi said. ''If foreign forces leave early, the situation will get worse.''  Human rights groups, nongovernmental organizations, schools and businesses are left trying to figure out contingency plans for female employees and students should the Taliban return to power by force or through an agreement with the Afghan government.  In his announcement on Wednesday, Mr. Biden said the United States would continue to prioritize women's rights through humanitarian and diplomatic assistance.  But even now, the gains for women in some places over the past 20 years have been fleeting and unevenly distributed despite the millions invested in women's rights programs.  In Taliban-controlled areas, women's education is extremely restricted, if not nonexistent. In some areas in the country's east and west, the Taliban have opened schools to girls who can attend until they reach puberty, and in the north, tribal elders have negotiated to reopen some schools for girls, though subjects like social science are replaced with Islamic studies. Education centers are routinely the targets of attacks, and more than 1,000 schools have closed in recent years.  ''It was my dream to work in a government office,'' said Ms. Ahmadi, 27, who graduated from Kunduz University two years ago before moving to a Taliban-controlled village with her husband. ''But I will take my dream to the grave.''  If there is one thing that decades of war have taught Afghans, it is that conflict was never a good way to achieve human or women's rights. Since the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in 1979, war has continuously fueled more war, eventually undermining any humanitarian achievements.  Under the U.S. occupation, education opportunities, cultural shifts, employment and health care have benefited some and barely affected others, especially in rural areas. In those places, some of the war's most brutal chapters played out with many civilians dead and livelihoods devastated.  Often, women's opinions are unclear in these parts, where roughly three-quarters of Afghanistan's 34 million people live, and are often unreachable because of geographical, technological and cultural constraints.  ''Despite real improvements, Afghanistan remains one of the most challenging places in the world to be a woman,'' a U.S. government watchdog report released in February said. ''U.S. efforts to support women, girls and gender equality in Afghanistan yielded mixed results.''  Still, the Taliban's harshly restrictive religious governing structure virtually ensures that the oppression of women is baked into whatever iteration of governance they bring.  The Taliban's idea of justice for women was solidified for Ms. Ahmadi when she saw the insurgents beat the unveiled woman in front of her in Kunduz Province.  For many other Afghan women, the government's judicial system has been punishment of a different kind.  Farzana Alizada believes that her sister, Maryam, was murdered by her abusive husband. But a police investigation of any sort took months to start, thwarted by absent prosecutors and corruption, she said. Ms. Alizada's brother-in-law even pressured her to drop the charges by accusing her of stealing. The police asked her why she was pushing the case if her sister was dead.  Domestic violence remains an enduring problem in Afghanistan. About 87 percent of Afghan women and girls experience domestic abuse in their lifetimes, according to a Human Rights Watch report.  ''I lost all the hope I have in this government. In some cases, maybe the Taliban is better than this system,'' Ms. Alizada said. ''No one is on my side.''  Ms. Alizada's sentiments were similarly portrayed in Doha, Qatar, at the peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban. Despite months of negotiations, there has been little progress, especially when it comes to discussing women's rights, which neither side has made a priority.  At a separate peace conference held in Moscow in March between the Afghan government, political power brokers and the Taliban, only one woman, Habiba Sarabi, was on the 12-member delegation sent by the Afghan government. And only four are a part of the 21-person team in Doha.  ''Moscow -- and Doha, as well, with its small number of women representatives -- laid bare the thin veneer of support for genuine equality and the so-called post-2001 gains when it comes to who will decide the country's future,'' said Patricia Gossman, the associate Asia director for Human Rights Watch.  But one of the gains that is almost indisputable has been Afghanistan's access to the internet and the news media. Cellphone coverage extends across much of the country, meaning that Afghan women and girls have more space to learn and connect outside their familial bubbles and villages. The Afghan news media, too, has blossomed after large investments from foreign governments and investors, and many women have become nationally known journalists and celebrities.  But even their futures are uncertain.  Lina Shirzad is the acting managing director of a small radio station in Badakhshan, in Afghanistan's restive north. She employs 15 women and fears, given the growing insecurity, that they will lose their jobs. Even some of the larger national outlets are looking to relocate employees or move some operations outside the country.  ''With the withdrawal of foreign forces in the next few months, these women that are the breadwinners for their family will be unemployed,'' Ms. Shirzad said. ''Will their values and achievements be maintained or not?''  Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar.  Afghan schoolgirls in Herat. Girls and women make up about 40 percent of the country's pupils. Schools are often Taliban targets. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JALIL REZAYEE/EPA, VIA SHUTTERSTOCK) (A1); A woman begging at a bakery in Kabul, Afghanistan. Women's rights have been a low priority in peace negotiations between the Taliban and the Afghan government. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM HUYLEBROEK FOR THE new_york_times); Raihana Azad, a member of Afghanistan's Parliament. Since 2001, women have joined the military, government and police. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KIANA HAYERI FOR THE new_york_times) (A11)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003d "
490		"   AN APPRAISAL  A Portrayer Of Wisdom And Wit  By Ben Brantley  946 words 19 April 2021   1     She was unforgettable onstage playing seemingly serene women who rippled with restlessness.  Selfishly, my first feelings on hearing that the uncanny British actress Helen McCrory had died at 52 were of personal betrayal. We were supposed to have shared a long and fruitful future together, she and I. There'd be me on one side of the footlights and her on the other, as she unpacked the secrets of the human heart with a grace and ruthlessness shared by only a few theater performers in each generation.  I never met her, but I knew her -- or rather I knew the women she embodied with an intimacy that sometimes seemed like a cruel violation of privacy. When London's theaters reawakened from their pandemic lockdown, she was supposed to be waiting for me with yet another complete embodiment of a self-surprising life.  Ms. McCrory had become world famous for dark and exotic roles onscreen, as the fiercely patrician witch Narcissa Malfoy in the Harry Potter movies and the terrifying criminal matriarch Polly Gray in the BBC series ''Peaky Blinders.'' But for me, she was, above all, a bright creature of the stage and in herself a reason to make a theater trip to London.  More often than not, she'd be there, portraying women of wit and passion, whose commanding serenity rippled with hints of upheavals to come, masterly performances in masterworks by Shakespeare, Chekhov, Pinter, Ibsen, Rattigan and Euripides. Sometimes, she'd take you to places you thought you never wanted to go, to depths where poise was shattered and pride scraped raw.  How grateful, though, I felt at the end of these performances, even after a pitch-bleak ''Medea,'' at the National Theater in 2014, which she turned into an uncompromising study in the festering nightmare of clinical depression. Granted, I often felt sucker-punched, too, maybe because I hadn't expected such an ostensibly self-contained person to unravel so completely and convincingly. Then again, that was part of the thrill of watching her.  Most of Ms. McCrory's fans felt sucker-punched by her death, I imagine. Aside from her family -- who include her husband, the actor Damian Lewis, and their two children -- few people even knew she had cancer. The announcement of her death was a stealth attack, like that of Nora Ephron (in 2012), who had also managed to keep her final illness a secret.  I have great admiration for public figures who are able to take private control of their last days. Still, when I saw on Twitter that Ms. McCrory had died, I yelled ''No!,'' with a reiterated obscenity, and began angrily pacing the room.  Damn it, Ms. McCrory had within her so many more complex, realer-than-life portraits to give us. Imagine what we would have lost if Judi Dench, Maggie Smith or Helen Mirren had died in her early 50s.  Like Ms. Mirren, Ms. McCrory, at first glance, exuded a seductive air of mystery. Even in her youth, she had a sphinx's smile, a husky alto and an often amused, slightly weary gaze, as if she had already seen more than you ever would.  In the early 21st century, I saw her as the languorous, restless Yelena in Chekhov's ''Uncle Vanya,'' a role she was born for (in repertory with a lust-delighted Olivia in ''Twelfth Night,'' directed by Sam Mendes); as a defiantly sensual Rosalind in ''As You Like It'' on the West End; and (again perfectly cast) as the enigmatic friend who comes to visit in Harold Pinter's ''Old Times'' at the Donmar Warehouse.  In those productions, she brought to mind the erotic worldliness of Jeanne Moreau. It was her default persona in those days, and one she could have coasted on for the rest of her career. She brimmed with humor and intelligence, and I could imagine her, in another era, as a muse for the likes of Noël Coward.  But Ms. McCrory wanted to dig deeper. And within less than a decade, between 2008 and 2016, she delivered greatness in three full-impact performances that cut to the marrow of ruined and ruinous lives. First came her electrically divided Rebecca West in Ibsen's ''Rosmersholm,'' a freethinking ''new woman'' torn apart by the shackling conventions of a society she could never comfortably inhabit. Then there was her heart-stopping Hester Collyer, an upper-middle-class woman destroyed by sexual reawakening, in Terence Rattigan's ''The Deep Blue Sea.''  In between, she dared to be a Medea who had hit bottom before the play even started. In Carrie Cracknell's unblinkingly harsh production, Ms. McCrory played Euripides's wronged sorceress as a despair-sodden woman who believed she would never, ever feel better. It was the horrible, dead-end logic of depression that drove this Medea.  ''Nothing can come between this woman and her misery,'' observed the household nanny (played by a young Michaela Coel). But it was Ms. McCrory's gift to lead us into that illuminating space between a character and her most extreme emotions, and to make us grasp where those feelings come from and how they have taken possession of her.  I never failed to experience that flash of revelation watching Ms. McCrory. London is going to seem so much lonelier whenever I return to it.  Top, Helen McCrory, center, with Emily Watson, left, and Simon Russell Beale in ''Uncle Vanya.'' Left, McCrory in 2014 after a performance of ''Medea'' at the National Theater in London. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHANIE BERGER FOR THE new_york_times; DAVID M. BENETT/GETTY IMAGES) (C2)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003o "
491		"    Aiming To Operate 'A Theater For All'  By Mark Caro  1,778 words 19 April 2021   1     CHICAGO -- Ken-Matt Martin, the incoming artistic director of Victory Gardens Theater here, said he never has revealed this publicly before, but he has a Sankofa bird tattooed on his back.  This mythical creature, with a name that means ''return to retrieve'' in Ghana's Akan language, is depicted with its feet pointing forward and its head turned backward -- a reminder, Martin said, of ''making sure you have a reverence and understanding of the past so that as you move into the future, you know what the hell you've come from. That's key to how I move, how I operate in the world.''  And that's the delicate balance Martin, at 32, intends to strike as he takes the reins of this 47-year-old Tony Award-winning institution that had an even more tumultuous 2020 than most theater companies.  Between late May and early June, a key group of affiliated playwrights quit en masse, protesters demonstrated outside the boarded-up Lincoln Park theater, and its white executive director, who recently had been named artistic director as well, and board president resigned.  Victory Gardens has a new board president, Charles E. Harris II, and a new acting managing director, Roxanna Conner, and on March 17 it announced that Martin would become its third artistic director since its 1974 founding. He begins April 19.  That this new leadership triumvirate is entirely Black represents a first for Victory Gardens, a theater that has championed diversity while sometimes struggling to live up to those ideals. And this shift is being echoed throughout the Chicago arts scene, where Black leaders have secured the top jobs at House Theater, Sideshow Theater Company, Hubbard Street Dance and the Second City.  These moves came in the wake of the social-justice movement spurred by the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis and fueled by the demands of the ''We See You, White American Theater'' national coalition of theater artists of color.  ''I would not be in the position I'm in if we had not had that collective awakening this past year,'' said Lanise Antoine Shelley, the House Theater's new artistic director.  ''Sure, something is shifting,'' Martin said, ''but you're also talking about highly qualified people getting jobs that they're more than qualified for.''  Punctuating his assertions with laughter while sitting outside a South Loop cafe blocks from his apartment, the Little Rock, Ark., native was casual and comfortable as he discussed the weighty issues facing theater and the larger culture.  ''I woke up this morning and was like: You know? I'm not going to be cagey today. I'm just going to tell it straight,'' he said.  He wore a baseball cap from Brown University, where he received his M.F.A. in directing, and a black mask from Chicago's Goodman Theater, where he was serving as associate producer alongside the longtime artistic director Robert Falls when he landed the Victory Gardens job.  He was introduced to the entertainment world at age 12, when his mother drove him to Atlanta to audition for the Nickelodeon series ''All That.'' He landed a bit part and when that contract later prohibited him from taking a role on another network, he said he became determined to learn the business side of entertainment.  In Little Rock, Martin said, the majority of his classmates -- as well as teachers, principals, and doctors -- were Black. Moving to predominantly white Des Moines, Iowa, where he earned degrees in musical theater and public relations at Drake University, and encountered racism on the street, was a shock to the system.  Yet he remained in the city to pull off what he said will remain his crowning achievement: He co-founded the Pyramid Theater Company, which has thrived connecting the work of Black playwrights and artists to majority-Black audiences.  Martin said it took ''chutzpah'' to make that happen in such an environment: ''There were people saying, 'We don't need another theater. You all need to be working to make the theaters we already have more diverse.' ''  In 2015 Martin began a yearlong Goodman Theater apprenticeship. Afterward, as he pursued his M.F.A. at Brown University, he did work at the affiliated Trinity Repertory Company, where he recalled being asked at a meeting: ''Hey, can you help us figure out how to better market this show to Black audiences?''  ''Mind you, I'm a student.'' He laughed. ''What does that say that you have to come to me to figure that thing out?''  As producing director at the Williamstown Theater Festival, he spent the non-summer months in New York City negotiating contracts and transfer deals while having such random encounters as passing Adam Driver in a stairwell while the ''Star Wars'' actor practiced lines for a play.  ''I'm the only person of color, period, in 90 percent of the conversations that I'm having,'' Martin recalled, ''and yet here I am, just this kid from Little Rock, and I can run into Kylo Ren on the way to my office.''  The Goodman enticed Martin to return to Chicago in November 2019 to take the No. 2 artistic position to Falls. Martin did hands-on work with such productions as Jocelyn Bioh's ''School Girls; Or, The African Mean Girls Play,'' which had an artistic team of all Black women.  ''None of us had been in a room like that before,'' the show's director, Lili-Anne Brown, said. ''He understood how significant that was, and he worked to uplift it and protect it.''  Then the pandemic hit, live performances were suspended, and the team had to navigate a new path through the shutdown and ensuing social unrest.  Martin stressed the need for ''nuance'' as he discussed the Goodman. He referred to Falls and the Goodman executive director Roche Schulfer each as a ''mentor'' and ''dear, dear friend'' yet said his experiences there and at Williamstown and Trinity Rep solidified his determination to pursue a leadership position.  ''What I wasn't interested in doing any longer was being the Black or brown shield and token within some of these larger institutions that had snatched me up,'' he said.  A few miles north of the Goodman, Victory Gardens had its own problems.  Founded in 1974 and now based in the historic Biograph Theater in upscale Lincoln Park, the theater has traditionally focused on a diverse range of new work by Chicago writers. The theater's first official playwrights' ensemble included Steve Carter, Gloria Bond Clunie and Charles Smith, as well as John Logan, Jeffrey Sweet and Claudia Allen, who wrote extensively about L.G.B.T.Q. characters. The Cuban-American playwright Nilo Cruz joined later.  In 2001, Victory Gardens became the third Chicago recipient of the Tony Award for Outstanding Regional Theater. When Dennis Zacek, the first artistic director, announced his retirement in 2010 after 34 years, the board named the acclaimed director and playwright Chay Yew as his successor, making Yew a rare artistic director of color at a major American theater.  Yew shook things up over his nine years in the top job, bringing in his own ensemble of playwrights while aiming for a younger, more diverse audience and tallying his share of successes. (Lucas Hnath's ''Hillary and Clinton'' had a Broadway production in 2019.) After Yew announced his departure, the board in May 2020 named Erica Daniels, already its executive director, as its new executive artistic director. In response the playwrights' group resigned, blasting the board for not communicating with the theater's artists or for conducting a national search.  The administration's decision in early June to board up the theater's frontage -- at a time when other theaters in Chicago and New York were opening their doors to protesters decrying racial injustice -- inflamed tensions. About 100 activists assembled outside the Biograph on June 6 and posted messages such as ''BLACK LIVES MATTER. But do they matter to this theater?''  Two days later, Daniels resigned, as did Steve Miller, the board chair. A more inclusive, transparent search process followed.  ''I was one of the loudmouths yelling at them, and months later they asked me, 'Do you want to be one of the people who helps us chose our next artistic director?''' said Brown, the ''School Girls'' director. ''Victory Gardens' board has done more work at transformation than anyone else I've seen.''  She was pleased with the choice of Martin, saying, ''I think this is an opportunity to show everyone in the national theater forum what it really can look like to gut rehab a historically white institution.''  Falls said seeing Martin leave the Goodman was ''bittersweet,'' but ''it's a fantastic moment for him and the city of Chicago and nationally. He's an extraordinary person and a wonderful artist who brings a plethora of skills that most people do not have in running a theater.''  Like just about every theater company, Victory Gardens is trying to figure out when and how it will welcome live audiences back into the building.  Martin said he also intends to use the connections he made at Williamstown to give more Victory Gardens productions an afterlife in New York and elsewhere. And he expressed interest in bringing back older Victory Gardens playwrights to foster ''larger intergenerational conversations.''  ''But at the same time, yeah, I'm going to have some new writers,'' he said, ''because I know a lot of dope writers.''  He spoke most energetically about the need for Victory Gardens, onstage and off, to reflect and engage with the city's broad range of communities. ''The theater's mission literally says to be a theater for all,'' he said.  He hopes to draw on the wisdom of an emerging ''cohort'' of fellow artistic directors of color in theater -- not to mention the inspiration of that Sankofa bird -- to pull it off.  He's not worried.  ''If I figured out how to get Black people to come to a theater in Des Moines,'' he said, ''I can probably figure out how to get all peoples within this larger beautiful city to come out as well.''  Ken-Matt Martin is the first Black artistic director of Victory Gardens Theater. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NOLIS ANDERSON FOR THE new_york_times) (C1); Ken-Matt Martin, top, takes the reins at Victory Gardens after the theater's very difficult 2020. Above, the cast of ''Prowess,'' a play by Ike Holter that Martin directed at the Pyramid Theater Company, in Des Moines. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NOLIS ANDERSON FOR THE new_york_times; MARK TUREK) (C4)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003n "
492		"    Infowars Host's Reckoning Buoys a Scrappy Business  By Elizabeth Williamson  1,539 words 19 April 2021   15     Dan Friesen and Jordan Holmes turned their Infowars-skewering podcast into a business. In the post-Trump era, they're documenting Mr. Jones's reckoning.  CHICAGO -- Last year, Alex Jones supplied conspiratorial content to the leader of the free world. This month, he was shamed by a nun.  The Infowars impresario and his camera crew had accosted a man escorting three Latino children and their mothers to a Catholic Charities relief center in McAllen, Texas, on the border with Mexico. ''We know you're smuggling these kids!'' Mr. Jones yelled. Sister Norma Pimentel, the executive director of Catholic Charities in the Rio Grande Valley, then castigated Mr. Jones in a statement for ''interrupting the good will of someone providing assistance in the form of transportation for three mothers and their children.''  For Dan Friesen and Jordan Holmes, the latest contretemps was fodder for something else: Episode No. 547. The former stand-up comedians mock Mr. Jones for a living on their podcast, Knowledge Fight, but with the end of the Trump era, the duo wonder how long his conspiratorial carrying on can remain interesting, much less culturally relevant.  ''He just feels less and less in control of what he's doing,'' Mr. Friesen said. ''The presentation is reckless and absurd.''  Never one for strict coherence, Mr. Jones seems to be reaching for new levels of incoherence, Mr. Friesen added, ''so reactive, so self-contradictory, day to day.''  And that poses a challenge for podcasters trying to find deeper meaning to the rantings of perhaps the most important conspiracy theorist of the past decade.  Mr. Jones and Infowars did not respond to requests for an interview or comments for this article.  Mr. Friesen began Knowledge Fight in January 2017, at the start of Mr. Jones's on-air love affair with President Donald J. Trump. The budding podcaster sold his plasma to help keep it afloat, but it grew during the Trump administration into a profitable enterprise. It now boasts more than 2,700 patrons on Patreon, a subscription-based funding site. Mr. Friesen declined to quantify his total listenership.  Knowledge Fight's focus has shifted this post-Trump year to chronicling the ragged downward spiral of Mr. Jones, a conspiracist who has lost the plot.  ''He is worth exploring in terms of better understanding the right wing, and how did we get here from there? How did we disrespect information and the conveying of information so much that we ended up where we are in 2021?'' Mr. Friesen asked.  The removal of Mr. Jones from social media platforms like Twitter and YouTube has limited the availability of his archive. But through back-channel research, Mr. Friesen had captured and saved years' worth of shows, allowing him to trace Mr. Jones's career.  Knowledge Fight's comic conceit has the Infowars voyeur Mr. Friesen reviewing Mr. Jones's broadcasts with Mr. Holmes, who plays an Infowars novitiate.  The podcast still broadcasts from a spare bedroom off the kitchen in Mr. Friesen's rumpled apartment on Chicago's North Side, the hosts' verbal explosions sending Mr. Friesen's cat, Celine, streaking for cover. The studio is festooned with gifts from fans, including a toy ''raptor princess,'' the show's unofficial dinosaur mascot, a Lego bonsai tree and a tub of laundry detergent pods that a listener sent Mr. Friesen accidentally in an Amazon address mix up.  The scene evokes Mr. Jones's own scrappy start in the late 1990s, when he broadcast from a nursery in his Texas house.  Mr. Jones was influenced by the John Birch Society and right-wing Cold Warriors, but conspiracy broadcasters of decades past were ''boring men in public access TV studios dissecting the all-seeing eye on the back of a dollar bill,'' said Jon Ronson, a journalist and filmmaker who has known Mr. Jones for more than two decades. ''People were yearning for somebody who would be funny.''  In a world where truth was malleable and entertainment a premium, he said, ''Alex was a star.''  ''But it got darker. The money and the power got to him,'' Mr. Ronson added. Infowars thrived on stoking hatred of Muslims, spinning conspiracy theories about staged mass shootings, promulgating lies about Democrats trafficking children and, lately, sowing anti-vaccination fabrications.  Mr. Friesen and Mr. Holmes decided to counter Mr. Jones's version of entertainment with their own. The two men met through Marty DeRosa, a Chicago comedian. Mr. Holmes, 33, grew up in the small Northern Illinois town of Princeton. His parents were members of the No-Name Fellowship, a religious cult. The cult disbanded after the child of one of its members died after being denied medical treatment.  ''My entire life was influenced by a loud, large, brash con man cult leader,'' Mr. Holmes joked.  At the University of Missouri, Mr. Friesen, 36, got interested in American storytelling, including the conspiratorial stories Americans tell themselves.  He listened to Mr. Jones occasionally ''from the 9/11 days,'' when the Infowars host claimed to have predicted the attacks, Mr. Friesen said. ''Then, once I saw him getting involved in Trump, it felt weird,'' Mr. Friesen said.  Mr. Jones's plunge into presidential politics intrigued Mr. Friesen, who compared Mr. Jones to Charles E. Coughlin, a Catholic priest and similarly rambling, charismatic radio broadcaster during the 1930s who spiraled from populism to virulent anti-Semitism to obscurity.  For Infowars, a return to obscurity might be looming. After a dizzying audience surge during Mr. Jones's live broadcast of the Capitol riot on Jan. 6, daily traffic to the Infowars website has plummeted, to about one-quarter of that day's views and well below where it was in recent years, according to an analysis by SimilarWeb, an internet tracking company.  Traffic from social media has never fully recovered from Mr. Jones's removal from most big platforms in 2018 and 2019, for violating policies against abusive behavior, and posts promoting violence or hate. Websites like Infowars can attract casual readers chasing viral posts on social media. But those referrals have decreased significantly, with less than 1 percent of all traffic to Infowars coming from social media, according to the SimilarWeb analysis.  The major exception to this trend has been Facebook, from which Infowars gets more than half of its remaining social media traffic, even though Mr. Jones is technically banned, according to Ilana Marks, an analyst and marketing manager at SimilarWeb.  Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's founder and chief executive, weakened the ban by allowing Facebook users other than Mr. Jones and his company to continue to share Infowars content, a fact reported earlier by BuzzFeed News.  Infowars has undergone firings and internal ruptures. Mr. Jones's fringe appeal has been partly eclipsed by the QAnon conspiracy movement, which he has condemned. Having spent weeks urging ''patriots'' to the ramparts in Washington on Jan. 6, Mr. Jones has since labored to distance himself from the riot, which resulted in the arrests of some Infowars associates, including a cameraman last week.  For three years, Mr. Jones has had to employ a multistate team of lawyers, battling a half-dozen defamation lawsuits, including four related to his spreading of conspiracy theories around the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Conn. This month, the Supreme Court rejected without comment Mr. Jones's appeal of a court sanction in one of those cases.  ''We used to talk about his outbursts at the very beginning as being so fake, just like: 'This is performative outrage. You're yelling because you're playing that character of Alex Jones, who's supposed to be yelling,''' Mr. Holmes said. ''And now whenever you listen to him freak out, you're like: 'This guy's freaking out. This is somebody who is not in control.'''  With proliferating fringe-right commentators and even Fox News's Tucker Carlson threatening his conspiracy turf, Mr. Jones has increasingly segued to end-times themes on his show, starring the devil. He's also been talking about quitting his business, in which he deploys conspiratorial themes to push sales of diet supplements, air and water filters, and doomsday prepper merchandise.  ''He will talk about how Infowars is going to run out of money, and that's generally in service of doing sales pitches, but separate from that, I've noticed an upswing in instances of him just yelling about not wanting to do this anymore,'' Mr. Friesen said.  Part of the problem, Mr. Friesen said, is Mr. Trump's desultory exit: ''The last five years of Alex's content has been singularly focused around the ability of one strong man to be the change that's needed in the world.''  Mr. Friesen and Mr. Holmes figure that if Mr. Jones implodes, they'll find another misinformation maestro to skewer.  But so far, Mr. Friesen conceded, ''We haven't found anything, anybody, who's as interesting as Alex.''  Chris Cameron contributed reporting.  Chris Cameron contributed reporting.  Dan Friesen, right, with his Knowledge Fight co-host, Jordan Holmes. Mr. Friesen's podcast started off in 2017 chronicling a pro-Trump Alex Jones. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TAYLOR GLASCOCK FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003j "
493		"    Revisiting a Husband's Struggle  By Jonathan Wolfe  1,693 words 19 April 2021   2     A writer gives an update on her husband's struggle with Covid-19.  This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the pandemic. Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox.  The White House detailed a nearly $2 billion plan to enhance the tracking of variants.  A French minister said the E.U. was unlikely to buy new doses of the AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson vaccines.  Angela Merkel received a dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine.  Get the latest updates here, as well as maps and vaccines in development.  Revisiting a husband's struggle  A year into the pandemic, many of us are looking back to make sense of what happened, or searching for lessons as we slowly begin to emerge from the struggles of the past year.  Today, I'm checking in with a few of the stories and people that have resonated most with readers of this newsletter.  At the beginning of the outbreak, Jessica Lustig, an editor for The new_york_times Magazine, wrote about her husband's terrifying battle with Covid-19. I recently caught up with Jessica, one year later.  First, how is Toby doing?  He has largely recovered, but his recovery is slow, and he is considered a long hauler. In the weeks that followed his acute illness, his whole nervous system seemed deregulated. He would have soaking sweats, and he was getting these arbitrary sensations of electrical shocks and burning. He also had terrible nightmares. And since then, he has had neuropathy in his feet, which means that his feet and his toes go numb and are very painful.  Toby continues to fear that he has been permanently physically changed. There's a fear that the coming years may bring new consequences that aren't even known now. And I know that's really scary for him, and for so many people who have been just as ill and much worse.  How have you and your teenager, CK, been since you published the story?  I had assumed that we didn't get sick, because I thought getting sick meant how sick Toby was. CK tested negative for antibodies, but one day I said, ''Oh, your shoes are too tight. They must be rubbing you because you have a blister on each toe.'' But it turned out to be Covid toes, which is a common symptom among young people. CK still has them.  For me, probably in the second week of his illness, I felt as if I was fighting something off. I never got worse, so I was like, ''Oh, I didn't get it.'' But then I wound up having antibodies, so, clearly, I was infected at some point.  What were the next few months like?  It's clear to me now that we all probably had some version of PTSD. I remember at one point a pot lid clattering in the kitchen, and I reacted as if it was a gunshot. I physically cringed and cowered. I was so wired at all times because I felt like I was going to have to make an emergency decision at any given moment.  Have you managed to return to some sort of normalcy?  I think because of our experience, I have felt as if I could not take chances. I mean, I have antibodies, but I have not eaten inside a restaurant, for example, and wouldn't until we're all vaccinated. We never did the ''pod'' thing, and I didn't ride the subway for a long time.  But deep into the fall and winter, I began to see that deep sense of isolation and fear -- especially for my child, an older teenager. That's exactly the age when you're not supposed to be in your bedroom or under your parents' eyes at all times. You're supposed to be navigating the world and connecting with your peers and your friends.  What will you take away from this experience?  I've learned so much more about how isolating it is for anyone who goes through a serious illness at home and how much your world shrinks. Something that a dear friend who had cancer once said, that really resonated with me, was that some people don't know what to say. Some people say nothing. Some people in your life will not show up. Some people will show up and just say, ''Let me know if there's something I can do,'' which isn't really helpful.  I remember thinking how fortunate we had been, and how people showed up for us. And I tried to pay that forward when I learned of other people I knew who were caring for loved ones, or worried about loved ones who were sick with the virus.  What do you want people to take away from your story?  I always wished for people to know what it was really like. And if they knew what it was really like, they might understand that we all have a role to play in protecting one another and preventing as many people as possible from going through what we went through. And we were lucky -- Toby is alive, and there was a period when neither of us thought that was going to be the case. But in the end, I just wished that people would not have to experience something like this -- or much worse, as many others did.  Catching up with readers  During the past year, thousands of you have written in to tell us how you're coping during the pandemic and I've featured many of your responses in our ''What you're doing'' section. Often, other readers wrote in to say how much the words from this section connected with them. Frequently, many of you wanted to know more.  One of the submissions that received the most comments was from Chris in Prague, who had worked with his wife to build a transportation company, but lost his savings and was worried about losing his house. Since his submission, a friend started a GoFundMe page for him, and things have turned around.  ''We have gone from literally searching for change to buy bread to knowing we don't have to worry about it for a while, and we have been able to make a mortgage payment and pay some utilities,'' Chris recently wrote. ''The biggest improvement is our morale. We have been honestly brought to tears by the generosity of not only our friends but even their friends -- people we don't even know. My biggest takeaway from this is to let people know you are having a hard time, swallow your pride and tell them you need some help.''  In November, Mary J. Craig from La Conner, Wash., wrote about an activity that she was doing with her daughters. Every week, they would ask her a question about her life that she would respond to in story form. Her daughters gathered her answers, and they planned to organize her stories into book form at the end of the year. Many of you wanted to know the question prompts they were using.  Here are a few examples: What is one of your fondest childhood memories? Are you more like your father or your mother? In what ways? What is one of the bravest things you've ever done, and what was the outcome? Have you pulled any great pranks?  Finally, an update from Amanda Marie in Atlanta. In December, she wrote in with the provocative headline: ''Covid is my friend.'' Her 90-year-old husband was in hospice care at home, and the pandemic allowed her time ''at home, just the two of us, for whatever time we have left together and we are grateful.''  Amanda recently sent in this update.  ''I wrote that my 90-year-old husband and I didn't have to make excuses while he was on home hospice, and we were happy to be isolated and together for the time he had left. He died last week. Now, I have no shoulder to cry on, no hand to hold, no hugs. Flowers and food are left on the doorstep. Covid is cruel in bereavement. No, Covid, you are no longer my friend.''  Vaccine rollout  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it had scheduled a new emergency hearing to consider restarting Johnson & Johnson shots for April 23.  Pfizer's chief executive said that people would ''likely'' need vaccine booster shots within a year of being inoculated, followed by an annual re-vaccination.  Australia said its third case of a rare blood clotting disorder was very likely linked to the AstraZeneca vaccine.  What else we're following  Babies and children in Brazil are dying at alarmingly high numbers from Covid-19, The BBC reports.  Italian authorities have uncovered a rash of vaccine line-cutting by younger people.  Johnson & Johnson privately reached out to other Covid-19 vaccine makers and asked them to join an effort to study the risk of blood clots and address concerns as a single entity, but Pfizer and Moderna declined, The Wall Street Journal reports.  Vaccine hesitancy runs high in some African countries, in some cases causing unused doses to expire.  Here's how major airlines, international hotels and big tour companies are planning for the resurgence of international travel.  What you're doing  Teaching during the pandemic was terrifying. When it was my turn for the vaccine, I actually cried in relief. Now I am fully vaccinated, and still, I am nervous around crowds. I look at the unmasked tourists in the park across from my home with resentment. Why do I still feel threatened? Could a year of living in fear have created a type of Covid PTSD?  -- Jamie Krause, Spain  Let us know how you're dealing with the pandemic. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.  Sign up here to get the briefing by email.  Email your thoughts to briefing@nytimes.com.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00031 "
494		"    After 'Green Rush,' Canada's Legal Marijuana Suppliers Are Now Stumbling  By Ian Austen  1,480 words 19 April 2021   10     Most marijuana producers in Canada are still reporting staggering losses two and a half years after legalization.  EXETER, Ontario -- The mayor of the largely rural community of South Huron, Ontario, was looking forward to an employment boom when a marijuana producer used its soaring stock value to buy an enormous greenhouse on the edge of the municipality's largest town.  The purchase three years ago, in Exeter, promised to make his sprawling community a major hub for what seemed like Canada's next big growth industry: legal pot and the high-paying jobs it would bring.  But before any of the 200 or so anticipated jobs in the greenhouse were filled -- or before a single marijuana seed was even sown there -- it became apparent that Canada was already growing far more marijuana than the market wanted.  After sitting idle for two years, the one-million-square-foot greenhouse was sold last year for about one-third of its original purchase price of 26 million Canadian dollars, or $20.75 million.  Exeter's experience with the greenhouse -- high hopes, followed by disappointment -- mirrors the broader Canadian story with the business side of legal pot.  Analysts say one reason the sunny projections have failed to materialize is the tightly regulated distribution system introduced by Canada, which largely bans advertising and marketing. The halting roll out of stores in some provinces -- particularly Ontario -- is also a factor. Plus, surveys have suggested that many Canadians are simply not interested in adopting a new vice.  ''We were looking forward to it,'' said the mayor, George Finch, standing outside Exeter's 19th-century Town Hall. ''Sounded too good almost, eh? It's too bad. So it may well revert to vegetables again.''  When Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's government's legalized marijuana in 2018, a primary goal was to create a more equitable justice system -- not a major new business sector.  Investors, however, thought otherwise, and in the time leading up to legalization, a ''green rush'' swept the Toronto Stock Exchange. Money poured into companies starting up to service not only the Canadian market, but also eyeing other opportunities, particularly the U.S. market, where more states were embracing legalization.  Long dormant greenhouses were renovated and sold for record prices like the one in Exeter, and new indoor growing facilities popped up across the nation. Newspapers that had been cutting back on staff hired journalists to cover new marijuana beats. Like plastics in the film ''The Graduate,'' marijuana seemed destined to become Canada's next big thing.  The investment craze produced a strong echo of the dot-com stock boom of the late 1990s. And it ended with the same collapse.  Even with a slight recovery propelled by the spreading legalization in the United States -- New York legalized marijuana last month, and voters in four states backed legalization in November -- one marijuana stock index is still down about 70 percent from its peak in 2018.  Two and a half years after legalization, most marijuana producers in Canada are still reporting staggering losses.  And a major new competitor is looming: Mexico's lawmakers legalized recreational pot use last month. So the business climate for Canada's growers could become even more challenging.  ''There's probably going to be a series of shakeouts,'' said Kyle B. Murray, the vice dean at the University of Alberta School of Business in Edmonton. ''Things were way overblown. It's very similar to the dot-com boom and then bust.''  Canopy Growth, the country's largest producer, lost 1.2 billion Canadian dollars, or about $950 million, in the first nine months of its current operating year. Layoffs have swept the industry. Large producers have merged in a bid to find strength in size. The lights have been permanently switched off in many greenhouses in several provinces.  The big bets on marijuana, analysts said, were made on the assumption that marijuana sales in Canada would mirror the sharp spike in liquor sales that occurred in the United States after the end of Prohibition.  ''Everyone thought that in Canada the industry was going to move further, faster, and that hasn't happened,'' said Brendan Kennedy, the chief executive of Tilray, a major grower based in Nanaimo, British Columbia, that lost $272 million last year. ''One of the challenges around competing with the illicit market is that the regulations are so stringent.''  Mr. Kennedy is among the few leaders in Canada's marijuana industry still standing. As losses piled higher and stocks tumbled, most pioneers were shown the door. When a planned merger between Tilray and Ontario-based Aphria goes through this year, creating what is likely to be the world's biggest cannabis company, Mr. Kennedy will remain as a director although he will no longer be at the helm.  In Ontario, the plan at first was to handle sales through a branch of the government-owned liquor store system, the way it is done in Quebec. But when a new Conservative government came to power in 2018, it swiftly canceled those plans, which left only online sales through a provincial website.  Since then, the province's plans have changed two more times, making for an uneven introduction of privately owned shops. Even after a recent increase in licensing, Ontario still has approved only 575 shops. By comparison, Alberta, which has about a third of Ontario's population, has 583 shops.  While initial hopes for marijuana wealth were overly optimistic, Professor Murray said he was confident that a viable business will emerge, with the rising number of Ontario shops one sign of that. That prices have dropped closer to parity with street prices should also help legal sales.  ''None of this means that it's a bad market,'' Professor Murray said of the poor start. ''Too much money and too many companies were involved initially. Eventually there will be some companies that are very successful for a long period of time. And if we're lucky they become global leaders.''  One comparative bright spot has been British Columbia, previously the heart of Canada's illegal marijuana industry. There, sales in legal stores grew 24 percent from June to October 2020.  And in Quebec, while the government-owned cannabis store operator, Société Québécoise du Cannabis, lost nearly 5 million Canadian dollars during its first fiscal year, it has since become profitable.  Largely disappointed at home, some of the larger growers in Canada have pointed to foreign markets, particularly for medical marijuana, as their next great hope. But many analysts are skeptical.  Mexico's recent move toward creating the world's largest legal market could doom most marijuana growing in Canada, said Brent McKnight, a professor at the DeGroote School of Business at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario. Trade agreements will likely make it impossible for Canada to stop imports from Mexico while Mexico's significantly lower labor costs and warmer climate potentially give it a competitive advantage.  ''That would certainly put some downward pricing pressure on local growers,'' he said.  And as Canada's industry is forced to consolidate to survive, some worry about who will lose out as large, publicly traded companies come to dominate the space.  Long before legalization, many of the first shops to defy Canadian marijuana laws were nonprofit ''compassion clubs'' selling to people who used cannabis for medicinal purposes.  The current system's emphasis on large corporate growers and profits has squeezed many people from minority communities out of the business, said Dr. Daniel Werb, an epidemiologist and drug policy analyst at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto. Dr. Werb is part of a research group whose preliminary findings have shown that ''there is a marked lack of diversity'' in the leadership of the new, legal suppliers, he said.  Sellers in Indigenous communities, too, have been left in limbo, generally not subjected to police raids but also outside the legal system, although Ontario has began licensing shops in some of those communities.  ''I get more and more concerned about, on the one hand, the lack of ethno-racial diversity and, on the other hand, a lack of imagination around the fact that this didn't have to be a wholly for-profit industry,'' Dr. Werb said. ''It seems like there was a missed opportunity to think creatively.''  A large greenhouse in Exeter, Ontario, that a supplier bought in 2018. After a merger, its new owner sold it two years later without having grown a single plant there.; ''We were looking forward to it,'' George Finch said. ''Sounded too good almost, eh? It's too bad.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TARA WALTON FOR THE new_york_times); An employee of Canopy Growth, the country's largest producer, trimming cannabis buds in 2019 in Smiths Falls, Ontario. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS WATTIE FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003a "
495		"    Working in a Homeless Shelter, and Living in One, Too  By Daniel E. Slotnik  1,526 words 19 April 2021   13     Many employees of New York's homeless shelters are themselves in precarious economic situations, taking on multiple jobs, working overtime and struggling to find their own homes.  At the end of a 16-hour double shift at a homeless shelter in Queens, Amber Drummond, a security guard, was desperate to relax. But Ms. Drummond said she shared a room with a woman who was messy and constantly on her phone.  The room is in a Radisson Hotel. The hotel, in Queens, is another homeless shelter, where Ms. Drummond lives.  She has lived in four different shelters since 2019, often working two jobs, while spending her days off searching for an apartment she can afford. She has looked at some 30 places across the city but said landlords had rejected her applications.  ''Why am I still failing?'' said Ms. Drummond, who is paid $16.50 an hour.  Ms. Drummond's story is not unique. Many workers who tend to New York City's most vulnerable residents are themselves in precarious economic situations. Some take on multiple jobs, work staggering amounts of overtime and still struggle to find their own homes.  Their plight underscores twin crises that have grown increasingly acute in New York: the high cost of housing, and wages that often do not provide enough for the basics in one of the country's most expensive cities.  When Chantal Daley, 29, started working as a security guard about four years ago at shelters run by Acacia Network, one of the city's largest shelter providers, she lived in a homeless shelter.  She despaired of finding a home she could pay for on her hourly salary. Eventually a housing specialist at Acacia helped her land an apartment in a public-housing project in Queens, where she moved in 2019 with her son, who is now 5.  ''If it wasn't for that, I'd probably be in the shelter still,'' said Ms. Daley, who declined to say how much she earned.  There are no reliable figures on how many shelter workers are or have been homeless because employers generally do not track such information.  But interviews with homeless advocacy groups, lawmakers, officials at different shelter providers as well as shelter employees show that housing is a major challenge for many workers.  Though they typically earn more than the city's $15-an-hour minimum wage, finding housing is still a stretch when the median rent for an apartment in New York is roughly $2,500 a month, according to a recent analysis by StreetEasy, a real estate website that tracks housing data.  Christine C. Quinn, the president and chief executive of Win, which operates 13 shelters in the city, said some of her organization's residents worked in shelters.  ''Being a security guard or a maintenance worker at a homeless shelter does not guarantee you won't live in a homeless shelter,'' Ms. Quinn said.  ''I hear about it quite often and just with complete transparency, that was my own situation,'' said Donald Whitehead Jr., the executive director of the National Coalition for the Homeless, who began working in homeless services after several years of being homeless himself.  New York has the biggest shelter system in the country, mainly because it is under a longstanding legal obligation to provide housing to anyone who needs it.  A work force of about 2,100 municipal employees and another 9,000 to 10,000 workers for nonprofit providers staff the city's nearly 450 shelters, and the relatively low-paying jobs include those in security, maintenance and food service. About 50,000 people currently live in the city's primary shelter system, according to the Department of Homeless Services.  Isaac McGinn, a spokesman for the department, said the de Blasio administration had provided hundreds of millions of dollars annually to help shelter providers increase pay rates and standardize services, adding that housing problems extended beyond shelter employees.  ''The fact is, for any New Yorker working a lower-wage or middle-income job, whether in shelter or not, whether experiencing homelessness or not, it can be challenging to afford housing,'' Mr. McGinn said in a statement.  Mayor Bill de Blasio acknowledged in a recent news conference the challenges facing shelter workers and said, ''We have worked over the years to provide more funding to the nonprofit community so they could increase pay for workers.''  He added, ''I do want to make sure we are as fair as we can possibly be to working people with the resources we have.''  Shelter providers said that the pay can be low because many of the jobs are entry level, and that the wages are largely dictated by the competition for city contracts.  Acacia, which operates roughly 50 shelters and programs and employs over 1,000 people to staff shelters, and its affiliates have received more than $1.5 billion in city contracts in the past decade, according to the city comptroller's office.  While lower-level employees earn little more than minimum wage, they are paid on a range, company officials said. Security guards, for example, can earn $16.50 to $25 an hour.  ''Should those people get paid more?'' said Raul Russi, Acacia's chief executive. ''Of course they should. Do I control that? No.'' (Mr. Russi said his total compensation was $862,000 in 2019.)  The salaries Acacia pays, including Mr. Russi's own, are comparable to those paid by other providers, he said, and lower-level jobs can sometimes turn into rewarding careers.  ''I got people that started out as a doorman, went back, got their master's while working with us, and ended up now being vice presidents in the organization,'' he said.  But nonprofits should be able to do better by a work force they rely on to help run their businesses and gain their city contracts, said Kyle Bragg, the president of 32BJ SEIU, a union that represents security guards at city-run shelters and is trying to organize guards at nonprofit companies.  ''When providers who receive millions of dollars in funding from the city cheat their employees out of good-paying jobs, our communities suffer collectively,'' Mr. Bragg said in an email.  Many homeless people work and can qualify for various housing-aid programs, but often have a hard time navigating the byzantine bureaucracy. Even those who manage to receive rental assistance find that some landlords are hesitant to rent to them.  Charmaine Lathan said that she and her three children had to leave a partially subsidized apartment in the Bronx after she got a job as a security guard that pushed her income above the threshold for the apartment.  She and her family ended up spending several years in a homeless shelter. Eventually, she got a job earning $16.50 an hour with Acacia, and they moved late last year into a public-housing project in East Harlem, where she pays $900 a month for a two-bedroom apartment.  ''You have to keep a positive outlook on things for you and your family,'' Ms. Lathan said. ''That's how I basically got through.''  Even that relative stability feels elusive for Ms. Drummond, who said she sometimes worked more than 100 hours a week at different jobs as she moved from shelter to shelter.  Ms. Drummond described the constant sense of dislocation of working in shelters while living in one.  ''You have no control,'' she said.  Ms. Drummond, who is single and in her thirties, said she had an abusive mother and entered the foster care system, by choice, when she was a teenager.  She studied at the Borough of Manhattan Community College and got an apartment in the Bronx with the help of a Section 8 housing voucher. But she was evicted in 2019 after a legal dispute with her landlord, she said, losing her voucher and entering the shelter system.  Ms. Drummond said that because of that eviction and low credit, many landlords were reluctant to show her apartments.  She said that she came close to renting a studio apartment in Queens last year for $1,200 a month, but that the landlord tried to charge her an extra $700 fee, which she could not afford.  She has had to balance trying to find a home while working long hours in sometimes stressful situations. Ms. Drummond said she had been attacked several times at work, including once when a shelter resident lunged at her eye with a pen.  Still, she said she empathized with most shelter residents given her own tribulations.  ''I'm just here,'' Ms. Drummond said, ''just fighting for an equitable standard of life that all Americans should have.''  Susan C. Beachy contributed research.  Top left, Amber Drummond at a Holiday Inn in Queens where she works. Shelter residents have to use the side door, top right. Residents put food outside their windows in cold weather, above left, as their rooms do not have refrigerators. Ms. Drummond shopping at a Dollar Tree near her workplace, above right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARAH BLESENER FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00037 "
496		"    Shawn G. Kennedy, 73,  Times  Reporter Who Helped Change the Face of the Paper  By Katharine Q. Seelye  999 words 19 April 2021   6     She was part of a wave of recruited Black reporters who began changing the face of the paper in the '70s. She also helped rebuild New Orleans after Katrina.  Back in the 1970s, as The new_york_times lagged behind other papers in hiring reporters and editors of color, Paul Delaney, the first Black reporter hired in the newspaper's Washington bureau, was among those helping to recruit nonwhite journalists.  He was on assignment in New Orleans in 1973 when he ran into a Black television reporter, who told him that her twin sister, who worked as a fact checker for Playboy magazine in Chicago, was eager to move to a daily paper. The next time Mr. Delaney was in Chicago, he looked her up.  And that was how Shawn G. Kennedy came to work at The Times, taking a route as random as any in that era, before organizations like the National Association of Black Journalists were formed to help organize the recruitment of journalists.  Ms. Kennedy, who worked at The Times for 23 years, died on April 5 at the home of her sister, Royal Kennedy Rodgers, in San Francisco. She was 73 and lived in New Orleans. Ms. Rodgers said the cause was breast cancer.  Ms. Kennedy began her career at The Times as a trainee in the Washington bureau in 1975 as part of a program to cultivate minority journalists.  Max Frankel, who was the Washington bureau chief from 1968 to 1972, and who later became executive editor, had recruited Mr. Delaney from The Washington Star. Then, as Mr. Frankel wrote in his memoir, ''The Times of My Life and My Life with The Times'' (1999), ''We decided we had an obligation not just to raid other staffs but to open a path into our business for promising youngsters.''  The Times created that path by hiring people of color in the bureau as news assistants. Through an agreement with the reporters' union, Mr. Frankel said, the bureau used them as reporters while paying them clerical wages; in exchange, the bureau promised to sponsor them for reporting jobs in New York if they met Times standards. One of the bureau's editors, Bob Phelps, helped them by taking their work home and marking it up as a teacher would.  Ms. Kennedy made the cut. ''She was in the vanguard,'' Mr. Delaney said in an interview. ''Having her succeed and join the staff attracted a lot of other minorities to the program.''  At the time, people of color at the paper were relatively rare; more recently they made up about 26 percent of the newsroom (nine percent are Black) and 32 percent of the company as a whole, and The Times has established a fellowship program that attracts a great number of journalists of color.  In New York, Ms. Kennedy worked on the Metro Desk and was promoted to Long Island bureau chief. She then sought and was given the job of real estate writer.  ''She loved real estate,'' Lena Williams, another Black reporter who worked at The Times and was a close friend of Ms. Kennedy's, said. ''She was one of the first to see gentrification in Crown Heights and Harlem. She was writing real estate stories and turning them into lifestyle stories.''  Her dream beyond that, Ms. Williams said, was to work for the Styles section. Ms. Kennedy was an accomplished cook and knowledgeable about fashion, interior design and architecture. She was disappointed when she was told that she was ''not ready'' for Styles, Ms. Williams said, though she occasionally freelanced for the section anyway.  Mr. Delaney said that ''you're not ready'' was a common explanation when a Black reporter was denied a move. ''That was the kind of stuff we faced all the time,'' he said. ''That's what we had to overcome.''  Shawn Graves Kennedy was born on June 8, 1947, in Chicago. Her father, Lt. Col. James Vincent Kennedy, was one of the Tuskegee Airmen, the all-Black corps of elite pilots; he completed his training too late to see combat in World War II but became a career Air Force officer and flew missions in Korea and Vietnam. He received degrees in electrical engineering and worked on the Apollo space program.  Her mother, Shirley (Graves) Kennedy, went back to school after her children had grown and earned her bachelor's and master's degrees in African-American studies and her doctorate in political science. She then taught Black studies at the University of California at Santa Barbara.  With Mr. Kennedy in the military, the family lived on air bases around the world. The parents were intensely interested in current events and liked to read, and their children adopted the same habits. Royal Rodgers said that while living in Tokyo and having no television there, she and Shawn ''devoured'' American magazines. Shawn went to Ohio University in Athens but left for Playboy before graduating.  She married Harold Brown, an investment manager, in 1997 and left The Times shortly thereafter. They moved to Sacramento and Washington, D.C., before settling in New Orleans.  ''New Orleans was her big second act,'' her sister said. Ms. Kennedy and Mr. Brown were already involved in economic development there before Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005, and afterward they devoted themselves even more to rebuilding the city. After Mr. Brown died in 2013, Ms. Kennedy continued many of his projects.  One project of which Ms. Kennedy was especially proud was overseeing the conversion of the historic St. Rosa de Lima church into a center for a Waldorf school, a performance space and a business incubator.  In addition to her sister, she is survived by two brothers, Kevin and Colin; a stepson, David Brown; and one step-grandson.  Shawn G. Kennedy in an undated photo. She worked at The Times for 23 years. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAM WASHINGTON)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00036 "
497		"    Liam Scarlett, 35, Famed Choreographer Accused of Sexual Misconduct, Is Dead  By Roslyn Sulcas  1,192 words 19 April 2021   7     He won acclaim in the dance world with remarkable speed. His subsequent downfall, amid allegations of sexual misconduct, happened just as abruptly.  Liam Scarlett, a British choreographer who won early acclaim both at home and internationally for his ballets, died on Friday at his home in Ipswich, England. He was 35.  His death was confirmed in a statement from his family that did not specify a cause.  Mr. Scarlett, who was a dancer with the Royal Ballet in London before becoming its artist in residence in 2012, was suspended by the company in August 2019 in the wake of allegations of sexual misconduct involving students at the Royal Ballet School. An independent seven-month investigation had found ''no matters to pursue,'' but Mr. Scarlett left his position in March 2020.  On Friday, the Royal Danish Ballet canceled a production of Mr. Scarlett's ballet ''Frankenstein,'' due to be performed in spring 2022, following allegations of misconduct on his part toward members of the Royal Danish Ballet staff in 2018 and 2019.  Mr. Scarlett's sudden downfall -- in early 2020 he also lost a position as artistic associate at the Queensland Ballet in Australia -- was as abrupt as his rise to choreographic fame. He created his first work for the Royal Ballet, ''Asphodel Meadows,'' in 2010, when he was 24 and still a member of the corps de ballet. It was immediately acclaimed as evidence of a major new talent.  ''This is a work of astonishing maturity, and the skill and confidence with which Scarlett deploys his large cast promise great things,'' Luke Jennings wrote in The Observer.  Mr. Scarlett's command of the ballet vocabulary, together with his fresh, idiosyncratic use of gesture and partnering, made his work intensely appealing to ballet company directors in search of new pieces that fit a conventionally classical mold.  ''The thing that is wonderful for a British audience is that Scarlett is steeped in the holy trinity: the 19th-century classical tradition, Frederick Ashton and Kenneth MacMillan,'' Debra Craine, the chief dance critic of The Times of London, said in a 2011 interview with The new_york_times.  He was soon receiving commissions from companies all over the world, beginning with Miami City Ballet, after its director at the time, Edward Villella, saw a dress rehearsal of ''Asphodel Meadows'' while in London. His immediate response, he said in a 2011 interview, was ''Wow.''  Reviewing ''Viscera,'' the piece that Mr. Scarlett subsequently created for Miami City Ballet, Alastair Macaulay wrote in The new_york_times in 2012 that its ''images, constructions and textures'' showed why Mr. Scarlett had ''achieved the status of an important classical-ballet choreographer.''  Speaking of Mr. Villella to The Times in 2014, Mr. Scarlett said: ''I owe Eddy a lot, because I was very aware that the American company directors would all be watching to see what the outcome would be. After that piece, everyone called.''  Mr. Scarlett ended his dancing career in 2012 and became the Royal Ballet's first artist in residence the same year. Over the next seven years, in addition to creating numerous pieces for his home company, he choreographed works for the Norwegian National Ballet, New York City Ballet, American Ballet Theater, English National Ballet, San Francisco Ballet, the Royal New Zealand Ballet, the Queensland Ballet, BalletBoyz and Texas Ballet Theater.  Although he tended to make abstract works when invited as a guest choreographer, his pieces for the Royal Ballet showed his predilection for narrative. With works like ''Sweet Violets'' (2012), a tale of Jack the Ripper and murder in Victorian England, ''Hansel and Gretel'' (2013) and ''The Age of Anxiety,'' a war-themed ballet based on the W.H. Auden poem of the same title and set to Leonard Bernstein's Symphony No. 2, Mr. Scarlett showed that he was part of a long tradition of dance drama at the Royal Ballet.  In 2016 he created his first full-length work, ''Frankenstein,'' a retelling of Mary Shelley's 1818 novel to a commissioned score by Lowell Liebermann. It garnered lukewarm reviews, both in London and when it was performed in 2018 by the San Francisco Ballet. His new version of ''Swan Lake,'' staged for the Royal Ballet in 2018, was received with more warmth.  ''It is far from a radical reinvention -- the setting and choreography stay close to the 19th-century original -- yet it stands out from so many other Swan Lakes in its attention to dramatic detail,'' Judith Mackrell wrote in The Guardian.  That same year, he choreographed the dance sequences in the Disney film ''The Nutcracker and the Four Realms,'' working with Sergei Polunin and Misty Copeland.  Liam Scarlett was born in Ipswich on April 8, 1986, the elder of two sons. ''Dad is a graphic designer and a good painter, mum loves music, but no one worked professionally in the arts,'' Mr. Scarlett said in a 2011 new_york_times interview.  He started dance classes at a local church when he was 4, and his teacher encouraged him to audition for the Royal Ballet School associate program. At 11, he joined the Royal Ballet School's junior division at White Lodge in Richmond Park.  After he participated in the school's annual choreographic competition in his first year, Norman Morrice, a former Royal Ballet director who was the head of the school's choreographic course, approached him and urged him to continue. Mr. Scarlett went on to win a prize for choreography every year at the school.  In his final years at the school, he created two works for its annual opera house performances, and after joining the Royal Ballet in 2004 he began to choreograph for the company's annual Draft Works showcase. But he was still largely unknown when Monica Mason, the Royal Ballet's director at the time, asked him to create a work for the company.  ''I kept looking at his work and it kept bearing out the promise he had shown,'' Ms. Mason said in a 2011 interview with The new_york_times. ''You want to give someone with particular talent the opportunity to see what they can do when they've really got a big chance.''  Mr. Scarlett's survivors include his parents and his brother. Complete information on other survivors was not immediately available.  After the allegations of sexual misconduct became public in January 2020, the Queensland Ballet and other companies cut off ties with Mr. Scarlett. Two months later, the Royal Ballet said it had ''no plans'' to work with him in the future, although his ''Swan Lake'' remained on the schedule before the pandemic forced the Royal Opera House to shut down.  ''We are deeply saddened to hear the news of Liam Scarlett's death,'' the Royal Opera House said on social media.  Liam Scarlett with the New York City Ballet in 2014. Mr. Scarlett, left, greeting Prince Charles at the premiere of Mr. Scarlett's ''The Cunning Little Vixen'' at the Royal Opera House in London in 2019. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE new_york_times; GARETH FULLER)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00039 "
498		"    A Swindle Turns the Spotlight on Literary Prize Scams  By Alex Marshall  997 words 19 April 2021   6     The organizers of at least five British awards received emails asking them to transfer prize money to a PayPal account. One of them paid out.  LONDON -- The organizers of the Baillie Gifford Prize, a respected British award for nonfiction writing, woke up on Nov. 25 to an excited email signed by the author Craig Brown.  ''Words cannot even begin to describe how over the moon I am,'' the email gushed.  The night before, Brown had won the 2020 prize for ''150 Glimpses of the Beatles'' (titled ''One Two Three Four: The Beatles in Time'' in Britain), a witty retelling of the Liverpool band's story.  There was just one problem, the email said: ''I'm currently experiencing a few hiccups with my bank and also with the pandemic.'' Could the organizers transfer the 50,000 pounds prize money -- about $69,000 -- to a PayPal account? ''If that's OK?'' the email added.  The message was written with ''tremendous confidence,'' Toby Mundy, the prize's executive director, said in a telephone interview. ''There was a bit of 'zhoosh' about the sentences,'' he added. But he smelled a rat, called Brown and discovered that the email was a scam.  Mundy's experience was not a one off. Over the past year, at least five British book prizes have been targeted by the same swindle -- and one has even paid out. In March 2020, the Rathbones Folio Prize paid £30,000, about $41,000, to a scammer posing as the author Valeria Luiselli, who had just won the award for her novel ''Lost Children Archive.'' The fraud was reported earlier this week by The Bookseller, a trade journal.  The prize's organizers had to find another £30,000 to pay Luiselli, and the ''lost funds were absorbed by cost savings elsewhere,'' Minna Fry, the prize's executive director, said in a statement. Luiselli didn't respond to a request for comment.  The scammer does not appear to have targeted prizes outside Britain. The National Book Awards and five other American literary prizes all said they had not been contacted. The Stockholm-based Nobel Institute, which oversees the Nobel Prize in Literature, had not been approached, either, a spokeswoman said.  Susan Swan, a novelist who helped found the Carol Shields Prize for Fiction, a North American award, said in an email that ''Literary phishing is a diabolical cybercrime, because most of us expect fraudsters to be working elsewhere, not reading about books.'' She added: ''We'll solve the problem by issuing checks to our winners, and avoid online payments.''  And it's not just literary prizes that have been targets for con artists. Over the past few years, agents, editors and authors have received fraudulent emails asking them to hand over unpublished manuscripts, ranging from blockbuster novels by the likes of Margaret Atwood and Ian McEwan, to short story collections. The motive for these rackets is unclear, as the manuscripts that were successfully acquired don't appear to have ended up on the black market, and no ransoms were demanded.  The literary prize scammers seem more obviously motivated by money. The fraudster targeting the British awards appears to use the same approach each time, emailing administrators late at night after the winners' announcement, using addresses featuring the author's full name followed by the word ''writes.'' (Emails from The new_york_times to those addresses went unanswered.)  As well as the Rathbones Folio and Baillie Gifford prizes, scammers also wrote to the organizers of the Encore Award last June; the Forward Prizes for Poetry, in October; and the Society of Authors Translation Prizes, in February, the organizers of those awards said. Britain's most prestigious literary award, the Booker Prize, had not been contacted, its director, Gaby Wood, said in an email. ''Oddly enough, no attempt has been made,'' she added.  Caroline Bird, a winner in last year's Forward Prizes, said in a telephone interview that Britain's literary scene was trusting and cozy, and that the scammer was ''clever'' to exploit that. ''It's not the place you'd ever come across someone on the rob,'' Bird said.  But several of the organizers who received the phishing emails said they suspected the fraudster was involved in British publishing, given the person knew whom to contact and when to send the messages. Mundy, of the Baillie Gifford Prize, said he wondered whether the scammer might be a disgruntled author ''who'd never won a prize and was furious about it, trying to claim what's rightfully theirs, by fair means or foul.''  Did any authors come to mind? ''There's plenty,'' Mundy said with a laugh. ''But I'm not naming names.''  Few share that idea, though, for one simple reason: The emails lack a certain literary flair. ''The prose was a bit dead, and there was no warmth,'' said Patrick McGuinness, the winner of last year's Encore Award, who had been passed the scammer's email. ''As a literary critic, I would say there was all the right words, but none of the fire.''  Brown, the Baillie Gifford winner, agreed. ''I'm not thinking, 'My God, it's Salman Rushdie,''' he said. A published author would have put more effort into the grammar, for starters, he added.  Mundy said he reported the matter to the police, but no one responded. Before that, he tried catching the fraudster himself, he added, asking for a phone number so he could confirm some details for a PayPal transfer. The scammer never wrote back.  Elizabeth A. Harris contributed reporting from New York.  Elizabeth A. Harris contributed reporting from New York.  Valeria Luiselli, the author of ''Lost Children Archive,'' won the Rathbones Folio Prize last year. Its organizers transferred the prize money to a fraudster who posed as her in an email. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Devin Yalkin for The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00030 "
499		"    Modern-Day Unbelievers, and Believers  716 words 19 April 2021   20     Readers respond to a column by Ross Douthat about high achievers' abandonment of organized religion.  To the Editor:  Re ''Can the Meritocracy Find God?'' (column, April 11):  Ross Douthat bemoans the secularism of many educated people, rightly sensing that some crucial, deeper perspective is missing today. He equates that perspective with Christianity or at least a ''biblical framework.'' But all major religions are inadequate to the spiritual needs of today.  Secularism is a step in escaping from ancient religions, but it had better not be the last one. Like our ancestors, we humans are going to need inspiration and shared motivation to survive. The next step is to expand our spiritual perspective to encompass the astonishing place of intelligent beings like us in an evolving cosmos of dark matter and dark energy.  The cosmic context of our planet provides the first large-scale perspective on the meaning of our moment in global history and the scale of our own reverberations into the future. The real miracle is that cosmologists have actually discovered this, the only story equally true for everyone on Earth.  If ever there were a time to rethink the meaning and power and possibly saving grace of human spirituality, it is now.  Nancy Ellen Abrams  Santa Cruz, Calif.  The writer, a philosopher, is the author of ''A God That Could Be Real.''  To the Editor:  Ross Douthat wonders what it will take for the meritocracy to find God. As he muses about different ways for intelligent, educated people, like himself, to find a path to God he doesn't mention the historical role of religion, to make the world make sense, as well as the political one, to control society.  These days, when faced with a difficult problem, some may turn to prayer, but prayer did not give us the vaccines that are solving our latest existential problem. Instead, most rely on the many years of applying considered knowledge, problem-solving and wisdom for answers.  When one looks at modern religious life, one sees scant evidence of these qualities other than as a place to meditate, take our money, and sometimes abuse our children. Is it a mystery why organized religion is declining?  George Loisos  Alameda, Calif.  To the Editor:  I'm surprised that any column so cogent, engaging, intellectually sound and independent found its way into this or any other newspaper. Judging by the comments I read, it was swiftly rejected and beaten down as apostasy to High Church Progressivism by the very people to whom it is directed.  Tom Hopkins  Claremont, Calif.  To the Editor:  Having faith is always a leap into the unknown. Meritocrats want to excel at it as they do at everything else. They want to achieve faith, be certain of it, know that it is true. They want to own it. When they can't, they give up on it.  It is hard to accept that faith is not something we can control or possess like a thing; we can only aspire to it with hope. For that, we have before us the vivid example of a pure faith in the ministry of Jesus himself, the man who turned every notion of power and leadership upside down.  We can only wonder at the depth of his humility and love. Few can approach it, but he welcomes, open-armed, anyone who tries and continues to care for those who turn away.  Margaret McGirr  Greenwich, Conn.  To the Editor:  Regarding Ross Douthat's reflections on finding God, perhaps the issue is not whether secularists can sense the value of religion but that the concept of the spiritual has changed and is no longer dictated by the metaphysical vestiges of religion.  Among certain groups of society the meaning of being spiritual is now determined by the values of the Enlightenment: curiosity coupled with observations and hypotheses that can be argued about and, if necessary, abandoned and renewed.  The spiritual is thus founded on the perseverance of inquiry rather than on the wishfulness of hope, with inquiry being as solid a basis for social organization and charitable action as what's on offer from theistically based faiths.  Joseph Eckenrode  Lititz, Pa.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Damon Winter/The new_york_times FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0003b "
500		"    U.S. Suicides Fell Over All in 2020, but May Have Risen Among People of Color  By Roni Caryn Rabin  1,790 words 19 April 2021   6     Despite dire predictions, the number of suicides fell by 5 percent over all. Still, smaller studies suggested the trends were much worse among nonwhite Americans.  Ever since the pandemic started, mental health experts have worried that grief, financial strain and social isolation may take an unbearable toll on American psyches. Some warned that the coronavirus had created the ''perfect storm'' for a rise in suicides.  The concern was seized on by lawmakers who were eager to reopen the economy. In March 2020, Donald J. Trump predicted a surge in suicides resulting from statewide lockdowns. A provisional tally of last year's deaths, however, contains a surprising nugget of good news.  While nearly 350,000 Americans died from Covid-19, the number of suicides dropped by 5 percent, to 44,834 deaths in 2020 from 47,511 in 2019. It is the second year in a row that the number has fallen, after cresting in 2018.  The decline came even as the number of unintentional overdose deaths rose dramatically during the pandemic. Some overdoses are classified as suicides; there is debate among researchers as to how many ought to be included.  But while the number of suicides may have declined over all, preliminary studies of local communities in states like Illinois, Maryland and Connecticut found a rise in suicides among Black Americans and other people of color when compared with previous years.  Whether that is the case nationally is not known. Federal health officials have yet to release a detailed breakdown of the race and ethnicity of last year's suicide victims, and some experts have cautioned against making generalizations based on trends in a few localities.  ''We can't make any bold statements until we have more national data,'' said Arielle Sheftall, a principal investigator at the Center for Suicide Prevention and Research at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio. ''It may be that only certain areas or certain cities have experienced these increases'' among people of color, she added.  Suicides are comparatively rare events, and it is hard to know how to interpret changes in small numbers and whether they represent statistical hiccups or broad trends. Rates usually fall off during times of war or natural disasters, when people feel drawn together to fight for survival against a common enemy. But the effect can peter out over time, and fatigue and despair may follow, experts say.  In the early days of the pandemic, families posted colorful drawings of rainbows in their windows and children stuck their heads out each day at 7 p.m. to ring bells and cheer for health care workers.  ''During the early phase of a natural disaster, there's a sense of community building, a feeling that we're all in this together,'' said Dr. Christine Moutier, chief medical officer for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. ''The survival instinct can really kick in front and center.''  The initial sense of crisis and purpose may have been a source of strength for people around the world. A new study of suicide trends among residents of 10 countries and 11 states or regions with higher incomes found that the number remained largely unchanged or had even declined during the early months of the pandemic, though there were increases in suicide later in the year in some areas. (Another study that has not yet been peer reviewed reported sharp increases in suicide from July to November in Japan, with a greater increase in suicides among women during that time period.)  In the United States, the pandemic has taken a starkly disproportionate toll on communities of color: Hispanic, Black and Native Americans, as well as Alaska Natives, are more likely than white Americans to be hospitalized with Covid-19 and to die from it. Two in five Black and Hispanic Americans have lost a close friend or family member to the virus, compared with one in four white adults.  People of color have also been pummeled financially, particularly low-wage earners who have lost their jobs and had few resources on which to fall back. Many who remain employed hold jobs that put them at risk of contracting the virus on a daily basis.  Anxiety and depression have risen across the board, and many Americans are consumed with worry about their health and that of their families. A recent study found that one in 12 adults has had thoughts of suicide; Hispanic Americans in particular said they were depressed and stressed about keeping a roof over their heads and having enough food to eat.  Some Americans plunged into poverty for the first time, shattering their sense of identity and self, said Dr. Brandi Jackson, a psychiatrist who is director of integrative behavioral health at Howard Brown Health in Chicago.  News reports about the killings of Black people, from Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery to the shocking death of George Floyd in May, added to the trauma for Black Americans, Dr. Jackson said.  ''It's one stressor on top of another stressor on top of another stressor,'' Dr. Sheftall said. ''You've lost your job. You've lost people in your family. Then there's George Floyd. At one point, I had to shut the TV off.''  Researchers who study the racial trends said increases in suicide among people of color were consistent across the cities and regions that they examined -- and all the more striking because suicide rates among Black and Hispanic Americans had always been comparatively low, about one-third the rate among white Americans.  Rodney Moore Sr., of Anaheim, Calif., lost his 14-year-old son, Rodney Jr., to suicide in January. Mr. Moore believes that his son despaired when his school did not reopen as expected earlier this year.  Mr. Moore urged parents to be on the lookout for any changes in behavior or mood in their children that could indicate hopelessness about the future. ''Look out for anything that is different in their sleeping, their eating, a change in attitudes, a personality change,'' he said.  Public health officials in Chicago were among the first to notice that even though overall suicide numbers remained stable during the first eight months of 2020, the number of suicides among Black residents had increased.  Officials were particularly concerned about a rise in suicides among young Black adults in their 20s, as well as by an increase among older people of all races, issuing a health alert in November and taking steps to beef up funding for crisis hotlines and mental health services.  The state's Department of Health in January reported a similarly lopsided trend, saying suicides in the state had dropped by 6.8 percent over all, but they had risen by 27.7 percent among Black residents and by 6 percent among Hispanic individuals.  ''It's important to not just be monitoring the topline numbers, because we know that Covid has impacted different communities in disparate ways,'' said Matthew Richards, the deputy commissioner for behavior health at Chicago Department of Public Health.  ''When we talk about Covid and the amount of trauma, grief and stress at the community level -- we should not underestimate how significant a public health issue that has the potential to be.''  A similar trend appeared in Maryland, where researchers analyzed suicide deaths from March 5, 2020, when a statewide emergency was declared, to May 7, when public spaces started to reopen, and then compared them with the same periods during previous years.  The study found that suicides fell by almost half among white Americans -- but doubled among Black residents of the state after the emergency declaration in March. (There was no change in suicide trends from Jan. 1 to March 4 of last year.)  ''It's clear the pandemic has hit African-Americans a lot harder than it has whites,'' said Dr. Paul Nestadt, an assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Johns Hopkins who was the senior author of the study, which was published in JAMA Psychiatry in December.  ''The pandemic may have been a perfect storm, but we've all been in very different boats in that storm,'' he added.  He and a colleague, Michael Bray, have continued to investigate and say there is preliminary evidence that suicide rates have also increased among Hispanics in Maryland last year.  In Connecticut, Yale University scientists who studied death rates during the period of strict stay-at-home measures in that state, between March 10 and May 20 of last year, were also at first surprised to find that the overall suicide rate in the state had plummeted by 20 percent, when compared with the same period in 2019.  But a closer look revealed that while suicide among white residents had plunged to a six-year low, the rate among the nonwhite population had risen.  Of 74 Connecticut residents who died by suicide during the lockdown period, 23 percent identified as nonwhite, nearly double the percentage of suicide deaths compared with the previous six years, the researchers found. Neither the average age of suicide death (50) nor the sex ratio (three-quarters were men) had changed.  ''It was deeply disturbing,'' said Dr. Thomas O. Mitchell, a psychiatrist and one of the authors of the paper, which was published in the journal Psychiatry Research in December. He said that financial strain -- known to be strongly linked to suicide -- might have played a critical role in the deaths.  ''People in minority groups already face unique economic challenges, so the financial crisis from losing a job during the pandemic might be felt even more intensely by these communities,'' Dr. Mitchell said, adding that those who continued to work in public-facing jobs ''are putting their life on the line every day -- a stressful thing to do.''  Jasmin Pierre, a Black woman who is now a mental health advocate, narrowly survived a suicide attempt seven years ago after a number of setbacks, including a job loss and the death of her sister.  Many friends and relatives responded with disbelief. ''They said, 'Black people don't do that,' or, 'Girl, go and pray,''' recalled Ms. Pierre, who has developed an educational app called The Safe Place. ''But actually, we do do that. We just don't talk about it. It's taboo.''  If you are having thoughts of suicide, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 (TALK). You can find a list of additional resources at SpeakingOfSuicide.com/resources .  In the early days of the pandemic, families posted drawings of rainbows on their homes in a show of community building. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARIAN CARRASQUERO FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0002y "
501		"    Trump's Killing Spree Continues  By Elizabeth Bruenig  1,276 words 19 April 2021   21     Arizona follows a model that lets the government ignore questions of cruelty.  Arizona's attorney general, Mark Brnovich, has a problem: There's no easy way to kill people. Arizona hasn't carried out any executions since it bungled the killing of Joseph Wood in 2014, leaving him gasping and gulping for air during the roughly two hours it took him to die from a lethal injection. In a country where cruel and unusual punishment is constitutionally prohibited, Mr. Wood's long and agonizing demise belied assurances that lethal injection is humane and scientific, providing a death akin to falling asleep.  But Arizona's pause in executions may be nearing an end -- not because someone has produced a cruelty-free method of killing a person, but because the state is following the blueprint pioneered by the Trump administration when it pushed through 13 federal executions in its final months.  In 2019, Attorney General Bill Barr announced that the federal government would resume executions after a 17-year lapse caused by the unavailability of certain lethal chemicals, and despite a still-pending lawsuit concerning the method of execution itself. Mr. Barr announced that the Justice Department had procured the sedative pentobarbital, often used to euthanize animals, from secret sources and that it would begin executing prisoners with that drug alone.  As soon as Mr. Barr shared his news -- what pride the prospect of 13 corpses can supply! -- Mr. Brnovich began lobbying Gov. Doug Ducey of Arizona to follow his lead. Mr. Barr's announcement, Mr. Brnovich wrote to Mr. Ducey, ''suggests that the federal government has successfully obtained pentobarbital. These recent developments establish that it is now time to resume executions in Arizona.''  Mr. Brnovich got his wish. But legal challenges to death by lethal injection still remain, and it's not at all clear that the way America kills Americans comports with our own founding principles.  Because the Eighth Amendment contains no explanation of what its ban on cruel and unusual punishment means, the Supreme Court has held that the principle ''must draw its meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.'' And yet the court has also held that in order to successfully challenge a method of killing on Eighth Amendment grounds, a prisoner must provide an alternative that is ''feasible, readily implemented'' and likely to significantly reduce a ''risk of severe pain.'' In other words, the question of whether evolving standards of decency by a maturing society would find a method of execution cruel is irrelevant; all that matters is whether the prisoner can prove there's a better alternative.  Yet cruelty does matter. And scientific evidence suggests that pentobarbital poisoning is an excruciating way to die.  Joel Zivot, an anesthesiologist, intensive care physician and associate professor at Emory University School of Medicine, deduced as much when he pored over autopsy reports of executed prisoners. He noticed that the lungs removed from the corpses were roughly double the weight of ordinary cadaver lungs.  ''The only way for that to happen would be that fluid is filling into the lungs during execution,'' he said. As the bloody, frothy fluid saturated the lungs, Dr. Zivot told me, ''it would be perceived by the person,'' as they lay ''choking to death and drowning in their own lung secretions.''  ''And so I thought, well, that's terrible,'' he said. ''And I'm so glad to bring it forward. And now we know, and we can dispense with this method of execution that's clearly bad.''  Dr. Zivot began writing about the issue, then testifying in court as an expert on lethal injection for defense teams. He was disheartened -- and infuriated -- to find that the facts about death by lethal injection seemed irrelevant to judges.  ''They seem to just believe that this doesn't matter,'' Dr. Zivot said. ''I can't make sense of it. It's not that they say this isn't happening. They'll say, 'Well, you know -- it's brief and it's not material.'''  A great tangled mass of thought coils around the question of how much suffering ought to be inflicted upon a person as the state kills him.  ''To constitute cruel and unusual punishment, an execution method must present a 'substantial' or 'objectively intolerable' risk of serious harm,'' Chief Justice John Roberts wrote in a 2008 opinion.  What do courts consider serious harm when death is the intended outcome?  ''I would say they are looking for pain,'' Megan McCracken, a capital defense attorney and expert on method-of-execution challenges, told me. ''And they're looking often for a drawn-out process. But they never find it.''  Yet past lethal injection protocols have included paralytics, which would prevent prisoners from describing their condition.  Both the federal supply of pentobarbital and Arizona's cache of the poison were obtained in secrecy. A recent investigation by The Guardian revealed the state's stock arrived in unmarked bottles and boxes, from a vendor not revealed to the public, with a $1.5 million dollar price tag. Other states, too, are pursuing the drug.  While a Federal District Court judge ruled last summer that injecting lethal chemicals without physicians' prescriptions violated the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the court declined to order a remedy or relief on the grounds that no harm could be demonstrated and the execution of Keith Nelson went forward. If the courts believe that drug regulations don't necessarily apply to killing drugs, it's difficult to determine how anyone would know if the particular batch deployed was defective or expired, or how those flaws would affect inmates. The only people who could helpfully remark on the experience are dead.  Is it cruel to kill a person with this drug, in this era, in this particular way? Does it matter that we can't know with any certainty, and that what we do know suggests the possibility of suffering not unlike death by drowning? Is it bad for us, as a people, to be reduced to assenting to the best kind of cruelty we can conjure, as opposed to permitting no cruelty at all?  I have seen a person poisoned to death by pentobarbital. It isn't still, it isn't a peaceful drifting. Someone hiding behind a wall introduces a chemical into the vein of the prisoner strapped to a gurney, helpless, as witnesses on three sides watch through glass as the prisoner dies, heaving for breath.  In his essay on cruelty, Montaigne quotes Seneca lamenting ''that a man should kill a man, not being angry, not in fear, only for the sake of the spectacle.'' It's hard to think of a more fitting indictment of the American practice of execution.  If the law fails to conform to justice and Mr. Brnovich is able to set execution dates for the souls eligible for killing on Arizona's death row, history will record that he did so using a legally dubious drug protocol that is most likely agonizing, that he did it for the sheer spectacle of it and that Mr. Barr and Mr. Trump showed him the way.  Elizabeth Bruenig (@ebruenig) is an Opinion writer.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mike Simons/Getty Images FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0002x "
502		"    Visit Vaccinated Friends  By Zoë M. McLaren  940 words 19 April 2021   21     Still waiting for your Covid-19 vaccine dose? Here's one way to stay safe and keep cases down until your appointment.  The Covid-19 vaccines are a medical marvel. But many people are still waiting their turn to get vaccinated. Right now, with more infectious variants spreading and no authorized vaccine for children, the risks of Covid-19 to unvaccinated people remain high.  While much of the national conversation has focused on what vaccinated people can do, it's also the case that the unvaccinated can take advantage of the protection that many of their friends and neighbors now have. The social benefits of vaccination can also extend to those still waiting for their dose.  Before I got my Johnson & Johnson vaccination, I slowly expanded my close contacts to spend time unmasked and indoors with my fully vaccinated friends, while taking standard precautions otherwise. It's a relatively safe way to make the pandemic more bearable for all of us while also keeping cases down.  Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows the vaccines not only protect against severe illness, but also greatly reduce the risk of mild and asymptomatic cases, so they help prevent overall transmission too. Vaccinated people can get infected, but it is rare.  That means that for an unvaccinated person, spending time with a fully vaccinated person unmasked and indoors is far safer than the same contact with another unvaccinated person. While I wait for my vaccine to take full effect, I can reduce my personal risk of Covid-19 by socializing with vaccinated friends rather than unvaccinated friends.  The C.D.C. recently updated its guidelines to reflect new evidence that unmasked, indoor contact between fully vaccinated people and a single household of unvaccinated people is fairly safe, as long as none of the unvaccinated people or the people they live with are at high risk for severe Covid-19 and the gathering size is small. Recently, we've seen many joyful unmasked, indoor reunions of fully vaccinated grandparents with their unvaccinated grandchildren.  The key is that fully vaccinated people should visit with only one unvaccinated household at a time so that unvaccinated people from two or more households don't come into contact with one another. This approach is similar to quarantine bubbles, but in this case, fully vaccinated people can interact with several different bubbles because their risk of transmitting the virus is so low. (Unvaccinated people should maintain standard precautions when in the presence of other unvaccinated people.)  When unvaccinated people make the choice to spend time with fully vaccinated people rather than other unvaccinated people, they also help keep cases down overall. Though the risk is not zero, studies show that vaccinated people are unlikely to contract or spread the coronavirus, so they slow transmission and prevent outbreaks. Unvaccinated people who predominantly or exclusively spend time with fully vaccinated contacts have a very low chance of getting infected in the first place. And they therefore pose an even smaller risk of spreading it to others.  Some may worry that encouraging vaccinated people to interact with unvaccinated people, including unmasked and indoors, is irresponsible. But this strategy is consistent with C.D.C. recommendations. Rising vaccination rates allow both vaccinated and unvaccinated people to reap the benefits of social contact by gradually expanding whom they socialize with in a way that keeps Covid-19 risk to a minimum.  This can work well for households with unvaccinated children, too. Spending time with another household where every member is vaccinated is quite safe. For the lowest risk this means households with adults only, but it can include households with kids, too, once a pediatric vaccine is authorized. Unvaccinated children who spend time primarily with fully vaccinated people are less likely to contract or spread the coronavirus themselves.  If people too quickly expand the number of vaccinated people they spend time with, there is a small possibility it could lead to a minor uptick in case numbers. But even in this worst-case scenario, cases won't spread very far.  For example, one unvaccinated infectious person could risk infecting several vaccinated contacts in a short period. Even though transmission between unvaccinated and fully vaccinated people is rare, breakthrough cases are possible. However, vaccinated contacts would be unlikely to spread the virus further so any outbreak would be small.  The wisdom of spending time with fully vaccinated friends is based on the same principle as herd immunity. Vaccinated people assist in protecting unvaccinated people by helping reduce transmission, which allows us all to return to normal activities even before everyone is vaccinated. This gives us a preview of herd immunity and helps ease the burden of the pandemic until we get there.  I'm grateful to my vaccinated friends for the chance to experience a little more normalcy safely in the midst of a pandemic. And when I'm protected, I'll pay it forward.  Zoë McLaren is an associate professor in the School of Public Policy at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. She studies health and economic policy to combat infectious disease epidemics including H.I.V., tuberculosis and Covid-19.  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips . And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com .  Follow The new_york_times Opinion section on Facebook , Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram .  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by Arsh Raziuddin / Photos via Getty FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j00032 "
503		"    Hoping for a Rebirth, Travel Agents Gear Up  By Lauren Sloss  1,843 words 19 April 2021   4     After a devastating year, the travel industry is hoping for a rager of a rebirth this summer. Travel agents are planning the festivities.  With more people getting vaccinated and the C.D.C. largely giving the greenlight to travel for those who have had all their shots, a real-deal vacation this summer may be a reality for millions of Americans.  The news couldn't come soon enough for the travel industry, which is hoping for a Roaring Twenties-level rager of a rebirth this summer. Flight bookings are up, hotels are filling fast, rental cottages have no availability and travelers are desperate to go pretty much anywhere.  Acting as de facto party planner? The previously disrupted, still-kicking, often misunderstood travel agent.  ''We have clients who are calling us from the 15-minute waiting period after their second vaccine shot,'' said Wendy Burk, founder and chief executive of Cadence, a La Jolla, Calif., travel agency. ''They're making sure they don't have an allergic reaction, and they're on the phone with their travel adviser saying, 'Book me now! Book me anything!'''  Many travel agents are seeing an unprecedented surge of business, as Covid-19 has given them a new relevancy, thanks largely to the morass of constantly changing rules and restrictions that travelers must navigate.  ''We had two days in March where we broke records for the number of transactions booked in a single day,'' said James Ferrara, the president of InteleTravel, a 60,000-member global travel adviser network. ''Our overall business is up 35 percent, not from 2020, which was an aberration, but from 2019, which was the highest year we'd ever had.''  Nearly 50 percent of those inquiries are from new customers, Mr. Ferrara said.  Indeed, travel may be on its way back, but it's complicated. Harried Americans are looking for a proper vacation, not a stressful travel-planning experience.  Angelica Spielman, a San Diego-based financial consultant, first began working with a travel agent in the spring of 2020 at the advice of her mother-in-law. ''I wanted someone to help me get creative with my kids during Covid,'' she said.  Ms. Spielman, who is 38 and originally from Panama, traveled extensively with her husband and two young sons before the pandemic and enjoyed the travel-planning process. But the amount of time required to plan a trip, especially with the year's added complications, motivated her to try something new.  Once the pandemic started, she found that ''going to every hotel website, or calling them to find out what their safety protocols are, that's a lot of time.''  In 2020, her family traveled to Carmel, Calif., and Santa Fe, N.M., on the recommendation of John Beeler, their agent; this March, they traveled to Punta Mita, Mexico.  ''For this international trip, he knew what resort had medical facilities on-site in case one of us got sick,'' Ms. Spielman said. ''He can handle it, and I can be on vacation and fully relax.''  Booming new business for an old sector  Business, through online inquiries or telephone calls, is up for travel agencies of all types and sizes, from large companies like InteleTravel to two-person operations and even to newly opened companies. According to a flash poll conducted by ASTA, the American Society of Travel Advisors, in early March, 76 percent of travel advisers are seeing an increase in customers in 2021, compared to before the pandemic, and 80 percent are hearing from travelers who have never worked with a travel adviser before.  Even before the pandemic, travel agents scrambled to remain relevant with the rise of direct booking sites like Expedia and Booking.com, not to mention Google and Airbnb. Agents closed down brick-and-mortar locations and moved online, touting their expertise and connections while appealing to travelers too busy to plan trips for themselves. According to ASTA, the travel-agent business (or travel adviser, per a 2018 ASTA rebrand) saw an uptick between 2016 and 2019, because of millennials: This age cohort was eager to outsource the planning and benefit from V.I.P. treatment.  Ms. Burk said that 20 percent of her 2021 business so far comes from clients who are either new to using her agency, or, like Ms. Spielman, are new to using a travel agent all together.  ''Lots of people got burned last spring. They didn't have an advocate to call the airline and get their airline tickets or their cruise credited,'' Ms. Burk said. ''Now, the level of complexity needed to go on a basic trip has drastically increased. A client who, typically, would have planned on their own previously are looking to a professional to say, 'Please show me the ins and outs.'''  Another full-time job  The sheer breadth of information to track, including vaccine requirements and closed borders, not to mention the rapidity with which everything can change, is challenging.  This has become Lambie Swenson's role at Exclusive Resorts, a membership-based travel company that has a portfolio of 350 luxury villas around the world. Ms. Swenson's official title is the Covid Navigator (in addition to her role as the senior manager of member services). She holds regular Zoom meetings for and fields emails from Exclusive Resorts members trying to plan travel in 2021 and beyond.  ''A member will ask, 'We're interested in Cabo, but we've been very cautious. What's the overall feel there?' Or, 'My husband is vaccinated but my kids and I aren't','' she said. ''We get a lot of inquiries about varying requirements on different Caribbean islands. 'Will I be able to leave my resort? How many times will I have to get tested?'''  Ms. Swenson monitors the news, and relies on reports from employees and partners at the various destinations that the club serves. There are daily morning meetings to discuss any changes in requirements to any of the destinations.  ''Keeping up with the requirements for Hawaii alone is a full-time job,'' she said.  Cassie Bendel, who began working with Westwind Travel Service, a two-woman partnership, in August 2019, also feels that understanding the travel rules consumes a significant amount of time. She traveled to Jamaica last November to document and vet safety procedures for her clients and more recently, she attended a 90-minute online training focusing on Hawaii's travel protocols.  ''These are things that the average traveler just doesn't want to have to deal with,'' Ms. Bendel said.  Nicole Piatak, a nanny from Stow, Ohio, began working with Ms. Bendel in the fall of 2019 to plan her honeymoon, a six-day trip to Hawaii, in October 2020.  ''I love travel and adventure, but planning can be very overwhelming and exhausting for me,'' Ms. Piatak, who is 27, said.  When Hawaii closed its borders to tourists last year, Ms. Bendel took the reins rebooking her trip to January.  ''Once a twice a month, I would hear from her with updates on the situation in Hawaii,'' Ms. Piatak said of Ms. Bendel. ''I was so upset that we weren't able to go in October, and she just took all of it off my plate.''  Still reeling  While the outlook for 2021 is more promising, travel agents are still reeling from the devastation of 2020. According to ASTA, the average agency saw business crater 82 percent last year and it laid off about 60 percent of its staff.  ''The first couple of months, travel advisers were cracking their knuckles, getting their headsets on,'' said Erika Richter, ASTA's senior communications director. ''They were heads down, getting people home. Now, mind you, they weren't getting paid.''  Barring booking fees, which can range from $25 to around $100, depending on the type and complexity of a trip, agents typically make money with commissions from cruise lines, hotels, tour operators, sometimes airlines, often months after the client takes the actual trips. When people aren't traveling, agents aren't making much, if any, money.  ''My advisers were unwinding what would have been their biggest year ever,'' said Ms. Burk about those first months of the pandemic. ''There was almost a grieving process. They went from making a huge income to suddenly applying for unemployment.''  A different way forward  Travel advisers hope that the past year has emphasized the continued relevance of their services.  ''When I got into this business 30 years ago, I remember seeing a trust and credibility survey that put travel agents somewhere around the same level as a used-car salesman,'' Mr. Ferrara said. ''I think the adversity of the past year has focused travelers on the value of professional advice.''  Increased interest has also opened the possibility for new iterations of travel-planning businesses. The company Authenteco, which went live last May, has 24-hour text messaging support and an online interface allowing users to enter their travel style, interests and desired trip details; Authenteco has seen a 667-percent increase in trip requests since January. Another company, elsewhere.io, began in this month and matches travelers with local experts to craft itineraries centered around off-the-beaten-track experiences.  ''We've seen around 200 to 300 new sign-ups per month, since November, with no paid advertising,'' said Craig Zapatka, an elsewhere.io founder.  Alexis Bowen, another elsewhere.io founder, said that the company stays in constant communication with its network of local experts, whether based in South Africa or Mongolia.  ''They're the first one to know what's happening in their own country, getting information from their own government in their own language,'' she said. Having an accurate sense of how these local communities feel about opening up to travelers, before advertising trips there, is nonnegotiable.  ''A big part of our company is about evaluating the positive impact of our trips on the ground,'' Ms. Bowen said. ''The question has been, is it actually good for us to be pushing travel in a time like this? Is this really good for the destination?''  Shelby Dziwulski, the Authenteco founder, has turned down clients that she doesn't trust to be responsible travelers -- including one who refused to get a Covid test before a trip.  ''Yes, we want to plan your perfect vacation; yes we want it to be all about you and want it to be phenomenal, but never at the expense of a destination, their local community and their environment,'' she said.  Whatever the style of trip, and of travel agent, Ms. Richter of ASTA hopes that travelers can appreciate the value of having a professional in their corner.  ''You can only do your first post-pandemic vacation once. We hope!'' she said.  Follow new_york_times Travel on Instagram , Twitter and Facebook . And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Shreya Gupta FOR THE new_york_times)   Document NYTF000020210419eh4j0002u   "
